THE 

HISTORY 

OF  THE 

LATE   WAR 

BETWEEN   THE 

U.  STATES  AND  G.  BRITAIN.

BY  GILBERT  J.  HUNT. 

 


### CHAPTER 1: President's  Message — Causes  of  the  War — Energetic Measures  proposed. 




NOW  it  came  to  pass,  in  the  one  thousand  eight 
handled  and  twelfth  year  of  the  christian  era,  and  in 
the  thirty  and  sixth  year  after  the  people  of  the  pro- 
vinces of  Columbia  bad  declared  themselves  a  free  and 
independent  nation ; 

2  That  in  the  sixth  month  of  the  same  year,  on  the 
first  day  of  the  month,  the  chief  Governor,  whom  the 
people  had  chosen  to  rule  over  the  land  of  Columbia  5 

3  Even  James,  whose  sir-name  was  Madison,  de- 
livered a  written  paper  to  the  Great  Sanhedrim  of 
the  people,  who  were  assembled  together. 

4  And  the  name  of  the  city  where  the  people  were 

gathered  together  was  called  after  the  name  of  the  chief 

captain  of  the  land  of  Columbia,  whose  fame  extendeth 

to  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  ;  albeit,  he  had  slept 

with  his  fathers. 


5  Nevertheless,  the  people  loved  him,  forasmuch 
as  he  wrought  their  deliverance  from  the  yoke  of 
tyranny  in  times  past ;  so  they  called  the  city  Wash- 
ington. 

6  Now,  when  the  written  paper  was  received,  the 
doors  of  the  chambers  of  the  Great  Sanhedrim  were 
closed,  and  a  seal  was  put  upon  every  man's  mouth. 

7  And  the  counsellors  of  the  nation,  and  the  wise  men 
thereof,  ordered  the  written  paper  which  James  had  de- 
livered unto  them  to  be  read  aloud ;  and  the  interpreta- 
tion thereof  was  in  this  wise  : 

8  Lo !  the  lords  and  the  princes  of  the  kingdom  of 
Britain,  in  the  fulness  of  their  pride  and  power,  have 
trampled  upon  the  altar  of  Liberty,  and  violated  the 
sanctuary  thereof : 

9  Inasmuch  as  they  hearkened  not  unto  the  voice  of 
moderation,  when  the  cry  of  the  'people  of  Columbia 
was,  Peace  !  peace ! 

10  Inasmuch  as  they  permitted  not  the  tall  ships  of 
Columbia  to  sail  in  peace  on  the  waters  of  the  mighty 
deep ;  saving  in  their  hearts,  Of  these  will  we  make 
spoil,  and  they  shall  Be  given  unto  the  king. 

11  Inasmuch  as  they  robbed  the  ships  of  Columbia 
of  the  Strong  men  that  wrought  therein,  and  took  them 
for  their  own  use,  even  as  a  man  taketh  his  ox  or  his 
ass. 

12  Inasmuch  as  they  kept  the  men  stolen  from  the 
ships  of  Columbia  in  bondage  many  years,  and  caused 
them  to  fight  the  battles  of  the  king,  even  against  their 
own brethren! neither gave they  unto  them  silver  or 
gold,  but many stripes.

13  Now  the  men  of  Columbia  were  not  like  unto 
the  men  of  Britain ;  for  their  backs  were  not  harden- 
ed unto  the  whip,  as  were  the  servants  of  the  king ; 
therefore  they  murmured,  and  their  murmurings  have 
been  heard. 

14  Moreover,  the  Council  of  Britain  sent  forth  a  De- 
cree to  all  the  nations  of  the  earth,  sealed  with  the  signet 
of  the  Prince  Regent,  who  governed  the  nation  in  the 
name  of  the  king  his  father ;  for  lo  !  the  king  was  pos* 
se.'5sed  of  an  evil  spirit,  and  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead. 

15  Now  this  Decree  of  the  Council  of  Britain  was 
a  grievous  thing,  inasmuch  as  it  permitted  not  those  who 
dealt  in  merchandize  to  go  whithersoever  they  chose,  and 
to  trade  freely  with  all  parts  of  the  earth. 

16  And  it  fell  hard  upon  the  people  of  Columbia; 
for  the  king  said  unto  them,  Ye  shall  come  with  your 
vessels  unto  me  and  pay  tribute,  then  may  ye  depart  to 
another  country. 

17  Now  these  things   pleased  the   pirates    and  the 

"  "„••.-•       ,J'';1"  '-^!ise  it  permitted  them  to 
erasers  ot  Driiammigmuj,  «,*w 

rob  the  commerce  of  Columbia  with  impunity. 

18  Furthermore,  have  not  the  servants  of  the  king 
leagued  with  the  savages  of  the  wilderness,  and  given 
unto  them  silver  and  gold,  and  placed  the  destroying  en- 
gines iu  their  hands  ? 

19  Thereby  stirring  up  the  spirit  of  Satan  within 
them,  that  they  might  spill  the  blood  of  the  people  of 
Columbia ;  even  the  blood  of  our  old  men,  our  wives, 
and  our  little  ones  ! 

20  Thus,  had  Britain,  in  her  heart,  commenced  War 
gainst  the  people  of  Columbia,  whilst  they  cried  aloud 
lor  peace  :  and  when  she  smote  them  on  the  one  cheek 
ibey  turned  unto  her  the  other  also. 


L2  LATE 

21  Now,  therefore,  shall  we,  the  independent  people 
of  Columbia,  sit  down  silently,  as  slaves,  and  bow  the 
neck  to  Britain  ? 

22  Or,  shall  we,  like  ©ur  forefathers,  nobly  assert  our 
fights,  and  defend  that  Liberty  and  Independence 
^bich  the  Lord  hath  given  unto  us  ? 


WAR.  13 

CHAP.  II. 

Report  of  the  Committee— Declaration  of  War. 


N« 


OW,  when  there  was  an  end  made  of  reading  the 
paper  which  James  had  written,  the  Sanhedrim  com- 
muned one  with  another  touching  the  matter  : 

2  And  they  chose  certain  wise  men  from  among  them 
to  deliberate  thereon. 

3  And  they  commanded  them  to  go  forth  from  their 
presence,  for  that  purpose,  and  return  again  on  the  third 
day  of  the  same  month. 

4  Now,  when  the  third  day  arrived,  at  the  eleventh 
hour  of  the  day,  they  came  forth  and  presented  them= 
selves  before  the  Great  Sanhedrim  of  the  people. 

5  And  the  chief  of  the  wise  men,  whom  they  had 
chosen,  opened  his  mouth  and  spake  unto  them  after  this 
manner : 

6  Behold !  day  and  night  have  we  meditated  upon 
the  words  which  James  hath  delivered,  and  we  are 
weary  withal,  for  in  our  hearts  we  desired  peace. 

7  But  the  wickedness  of  the  kingdom  of  Great- 
Britain,  and  the  cruelty  of  the  princes  thereof,  towards 
the  peaceable  inhabitants  of  the  land  of  Columbia,  may 
be  likened  unto  the  fierce  lion,  when  he  putteth  his  paw 
upon  the  innocent  lamb  to  devour  him. 

8  Nevertheless,  the  lamb  shall  not  be  slain ;  for  the 
Lord  shall  be  his  deliverer. 

9  And  if,  peradventure,  the  people  of  Columbia  -go 

b  2 


14  LATE       , 

not  out  to  battle  against  the  king,  then  will  the  menifold 
wrongs  committed  against  them  be  increased  tenfold,  and 
they  shall  be  as  a  mock  and  a  bye-word  among  all  nations. 

10  Moreover,  the  righteousness  of  your  cause  shall 
kad  you  to  glory,  and  the  pillars  of  your  liberty  shall 
not  be  shaken. 

1 1  Therefore,  say  we  unto  you,  Gird  on  your  swords 
and  go  forth  to  battle  against  the  king  ;  even  against  the 
strong  powers  of  Britain ;  and  the  Lord  God  of  Hosts 
be  with  you. 

12  Now  when  the  great  Sanhedrim  of  the  people 
heard  those  things  which  the  wise  men  had  uttered,  they 
pondered  them  in  their  minds  many  days,  and  weighed 
t&em  well  j 

13  Even  until  the  seventeenth  day  of  the  month  pon- 
dered they  in  secret  concerning  the  matter. 

14  And  it  was  so,  that  on  the  next  day  they  sent  forth 
a  Decree,  making  WAR  upon  the  kingdom  of  Great 
Britain,  and  upon  the  servants,  and  upon  the  slaves 
thereof. 

15  And  the  Decree  was  signed  with  the  hand  writing 
<©f  James,  the  chief  Governor  of  the  land  of  Columbia. 

16  After  these  things,  the  doors  of  the  chambers  of 
the  Sanhedrim  were  opened. 


WAR.  15 


CHAP.   III. 


Reception  of  the  Declaration  of  War  in  Great  Britain 
— her  friends  in  America — Caleb  Stro?ig — Hartford 
Convention. 


A: 


.ND  it  came  to  pass,  that  when  the  princes  and  the 
lords  and  the  counsellors  of  Britain  saw  the  Decree, 
their  wrath  was  kindled,  and  their  hearts  were  ready  to 
burst  with  indignation. 

2  For,  verily,  sairl  they,  this  insult  hath  overflowed 
the  cup  of  our  patience ;  and  now  will  we  chastise  the 
impudence  of  these  Yankees,  and  the  people  of  Colum- 
bia shall  bow  before  the  king. 

3  Then  will  we  rule  them  with  a  rod  of  iron  ;  and  they 
shall  be,  unto  us,  hewers  of  wood  and  drawers  of  water. 

4  For,  verily,  shall  we  suffer  these  cunning  Yankees 
to  beard  the  mighty  lion,  with  half  a  dozen  fir-built 
frigates,  the  men  whereof  are  but  mercenary  cowards — ■ 
"  bastards  and  outlaws  ?" 

5  Neither  durst  they  array  themselves  in  battle  against 
the  men  of  Britain.  No  !  we  will  sweep  them  from  the 
face  of  the  waters,  and  their  name  shall  be  heard  no 
more  among  nations. 

6  Shall  the  proud  conquerors  of  Europe  not  laugh  to 
scorn  the  feeble  efforts  of  a  few  unorganized  soldiers,  un- 
disciplined, and  fresh  from  the  plough,  the  hoe,  and  the 
mattock  ? 

7  Yea,  they  shall  surely  fall ;  for  they  were  not  bred 
to  fighting  as  were  the  servants  of  the  king. 


16  LATE 

8  Their  large  cities,  their  towns,  and  their  villages 
will  we  burn  with  consuming  fire. 

9  Their  oil,  and  their  wheat}  and  their  rye,  and  their" 
corn,  and  their  barley,  and  their  rice,  and  their  buck- 
wheat, and  their  oats,  and  their  flax,  and  all  the  products 
of  their  country  will  we  destroy,  and  scatter  the  remnants 
thereof  to  the  four  winds  of  heaven. 

10  All  these  things,  and  more,  will  we  do  unto  this 
froward  people. 

1 1  Neither  shall  there  be  found  safety  for  age  or  sex 
from  the  destroying  swords  of  the  soldiers  of  the  king  ; 

12  Save  in  those  provinces  and  towns  where  dwell  the 
friends  of  the  king ,  for,  lo  !  said  they,  the  king's  friends 
are  many. 

13  These  will  we  spare;  neither  will  we  hurt  a  hair 
•f  their  heads :  nor  shall  the  savages  of  the  wilderness 
stain  the  scalping-knife  or  the  tomahawk  with  the  blood 
of  the  king's  friends. 

14  Now  it  happened,  about  this  time,  that  there  were 
numbers  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  country  of  Columbia 
whose  hearts  yearned  after  the  king  of  Britain. 

1 5  And  with  their  false  flattering  words  they  led  as- 
tray some  of  the  friends  of  Columbian  Liberty  ;  for 
their  tongues  were  smoother  than  oil. 

16  Evil  machinations  entered  into  their  hearts,  and 
the  poison  of  their  breath  might  be  likened  unto  the 
deadly  Bohon  Upas,  which  rears  its  lefty  branches  in 
the  barren  valley  of  Java.* 

*  Of  the  existence  of  this  wonderful  tree  there  have 
been  doubts  :  but  the  reader  is  referred  to  the  relation 
of  P.  N.  Foerch,  icho  has  given  a  satisfactory  account 
of  it,  from  Ms  own  travels  in  its  neighbourhood. 


WAR.  17 

17  And  they  strove  to  dishearten  the  true  friends  of 
the  great  Sanhedrim  ;  but  they  prevailed  not. 

1 8  Moreover,  Satan  entered  into  the  heart  of  one  of 
the  governors  of  the  east,  and  he  was  led  astray  by  the 
wickedness  thereof,  even  Caleb  the  Strong. 

19  Now  Caleb,  which  in  the  Cherokee  tongue,  signi- 
fieth  an  ass,  liked  not  the  decree  of  the  great  Sanhedrim, 
inasmuch  as  he  favored  the  king  of  Britain  ; 

20  And,  though  willing  to  become  a  beast  of  burden, 
yet  would  he  not  move  on  account  of  his  very  great  stu- 
pidity. 

21  And  he  said  unto  the  captains  of  the  hosts  of  the 
state  orer  which  he  presided,  Lo  !  it  seemeth  not  meet 
unto  me  that  ye  go  forth  to  battle  against  the  king. 

22  For,  Lo  !  are  not  the  fighting  men  of  Britain,  in 
multitude,  as  the  sand  oh  the  sea  shore  ?  and  shall  we 
prevail  against  them  ? 

23  Are  not  the  mighty  ships  of  the  king  spread  over 
the  whole  face  of  the  waters  ?  Is  not  Britain  the  "  bul- 
wark of  our  religion  ?" 

24  Therefore,  I  command  that  ye  go  not  out  to  bat- 
tle, but  every  man  remain  in  his  own  house. 

25  And  all  the  governors  of  the  east  listened  unto  the 
voice  of  Caleb. 

26  Moreover,  the  angel  of  the  Lord  whispered  into 
the  ear  of  Caleb,  and  spake  unto  him,  saying, 

27  If,  peradventure,  thou  dost  refuse  to  obey  the  laws 
of  ftie  land,  the  thing  will  not  be  pleasant  in  the  sight  of 
the  Lord ; 

28  Inasmuch  as  it  may  cause  the  people  to  rise  up  one 
against  another,  and  spill  the  blood  of  their  own  children  ; 

29  And  the  time  of  warfare  will  be  lengthened  out, 
and  the  blood  of  thousands  wiil  be  upon  thine  hoad. 


38  LATE 

SO  And  Satan  spake,  and  said  unto  Caleb,  Fear  not ; 
for  if  thou  wilt  forsake  thy  country,  and  throw  off  the 
paltry  subterfuge  of  Columbian  Liberty,  and  defy  the 
councils  of  the  great  Sanhedrim, 

31  Then  shall  thy  name  be  proclaimed  with  the 
sound  of  the  trumpet  throughout  all  the  earth ;  and  thou 
shalt  be  a  prince  and  a  ruler  over  this  people. 

32  Now  the  smooth  words  of  Satan  tickled  Caleb 
mightily,  and  he  hearkened  unto  the  counsel  of  the 
wicked  one  : 

33  For  the  good  counsel  given  unto  him  was  as  wa- 
ter thrown  upon  a  rock. 

34  But  when  the  chief  governor  and  the  great  Sanhe- 
drim of  the  people  saw  the  wickedness  of  Caleb,  their 
hearts  were  moved  with  pity  towards  him  and  his  follow- 
ers :  yea,  even  those  who  had  made  a  convention  at  the 
little  town  of  Hartford. 

35  Neither  doth  the  scribe  desire  to  dwell  upon  the 
wickedness  which  came  into  the  village  of  Harttof  d,  thg 
signification  of  the  name  whereof,  in  the  vernacular 
tongue,  appeareth  not. 

36  For  the  meddling  therewith  is  as  the  green  pool  of 
tmclean  waters,  when  a  man  casteth  a  stone  therein. 


WAR.  -ifr 


CHAP.  IV. 

John  Henry — Elijah   Parish  > 


L 


I ET  the  children  of  Columbia  beware  of  false  pro- 
phets which  come  in  sheep's  clothing ;  for  it  is  written, 
Ye  shall  know  them  by  their  fruits. 

2  Now  it  came  to  pass,  that  a  certain  man,  whose  sir- 
name  was  Henry,  came  before  James,  the  chief  go- 
vernor, and  opened  his  mouth,  and  spake  unto  him,  say- 
in?) 

3  Lo !  If  thou  wilt  give  unto  me  two  score  and  ten 
thousand  pieces  of  silver,  then  will  I  unfold  unto  thee  the 
witchcraft  of  Britain,  that  thereby  thy  nation  may  not  be 
caught  in  her  snares. 

4  And  James  said  unto  him,  Verily,  for  the  good  of 
my  country  I  will  do  this  thing. 

5  And  immediately  the  man  Henry  opened  his  mouth, 
a  second  time,  and  said, 

6  Lo !  the  lords  and  counsellors  of  Britain  have 
made  a  covenant  with  me,  and  have  promised  me  many 
pieces  of  gold  if  I  would  make  a  league  with  the  pro- 
vinces of  the  east  that  they  might  favour  the  king ;  and 
long  and  faithfully  have  I  laboured  in  their  cause. 

7  But  they  deceived  me,  even  as  they  would  de- 
ceive the  people  of  Columbia ;  for  their  promises  are 
as  the  idle  wind  that  passeth  by,  which  no  man  re- 
2ardeth. 

3  And;  when  he  had  gotten  the  silver  into  his  owo 


20  LATE 

hands  he  departed  to  the  land  of  the  Gauls,  where  he  re* 
maineth  even  until  this  day. 

9  Nevertheless,  the  people  profitted  much  thereby  j 
inasmuch  as  it  put  them  upon  the  watch,  and  they  guard- 
ed themselves  against  the  evil  accordingly. 

10  He  that  longeth  after  the  interpretation  of  the 
deeds  of  Henry,  let  him  make  inquiry  of  those  wh» 
acted  with  him — the  ministers  of  the  Hartford  Con- 
vention. 

11  Now,  there  was  a  certain  hypocrite,  whose  name 
was  Elijah,  and  lie  was  a  false  prophet  in  the  east, 
and  he  led  astray  those  of  little  understanding  ;  more- 
over, he  was  an  hireling,  and  preached  for  the  sake  of 
filthy  lucre. 

12  And  he  rose  up  and  called  himself  a  preacher  of 
the  gospel,  and  his  words  were  smooth,  and  the  people 
marvelled  at  him ; 

1 3  But  he  profaned  the  temple  of  the  Lord,  and  he 
strove  to  lead  his  disciples  into  the  wrong  way. 

14  And  many  wise  men  turned  their  backs  against 
him ;  nevertheless,  he  repented  not  of  his  sins  unto  this 
day. 

15  Neither  did  the  people,  as  Darius  the  Mede  did 
unto  the  prophet  Daniel,  cast  him  into  the  den  of  lions, 
that  they  might  see  whether  the  royal  beast  woald  dis- 
dain to  devour  him. 

16  But  they  were  rejoiced  that  power  was  not  given 
unto  him  to  command  fire  to  come  down  from  heaven  tc 
consume  the  friends  of  the  great  Sanhedrim. 


WAR.  2i 

CHAP.  V. 

American    Army — Militia — Navy — British,    Navy— 
Rodgcrs*  first  Cndsc — Capture  of  the    U.  S.  bri^ 
Nautilus — removal  of  aliens  beyond  tide-icater, 


HE  whole  host  of.  the  people  of  Columbia,  who4 
bad  been  trained  to  war,  being  numbered,  wasaboui 
seven  thousand  fighting  men.* 

2  Neither  were  they  assembled  together ;  but  they 
were  extended  from  the  north  to  the  south,  about  three; 
thousand  miles.f 

3  But  the  husbandmen,  who  lived  under  tlieir  own 
fig-trees,  and  lifted  the  arm  in  defence  of  their  own 
homes,  were  more  than  seven  hundred  thousand^  ali 
mighty  men  of  valor. 

4  Now  the  armies  of  the  king  of  Britain,  are  tliey 
not  numbered  and  written  in  the  book  of  Hume,  the 
seribe  ?  is  not  their  name  a  terror  to  all  nations  ? 

5  Moreover,  the  number  of  the  strong  ships  of  the 
peaceable  inhabitants  of  Columbia,  that  moved  on  the 
waters  of  the  deep,  carrying  therein  the  destroying  en- 
gines, which  vomited  their  thunders,  was  about  one  score  : 
besides  a  handful  of  "  cock-boats ;"  with  "  a  bit  of 
striped  banting  at  their  mast-head.'' 

6  But  the  number  of  the  fighting  vessels  of  Britain 
was  about  one  thousand  one  score  and  one,  which  bore 
the  royal  cross. 

*  Standing  army, 

t  From  District  of  Maine  to  Mobile  Bay  and  New* 
Orleans.  C 


m  LATE 

7  And  the  men  of  war  of  Britain  were  arrayed  ia% 
their  might  against  the  people  of  the  land  of  Columbia. 

8  Nevertheless,  it  came  to  pass,  that  about  this  time  a 
strong  ship  of  the  United  States,  called  ike  President, 
commanded  by  a  skilful  man  whose  name  was  Rodgers, 

9  Sailed  towards  the  island  of  Britain,  and  went  nigh 
unto  it,  and  captured  numbers  of  the  vessels  of  the  people 
of  Britain,  in  their  own  waters ;  after  which  she  returned 
in  safety  to  the  land  of  Columbia. 

10  And  the  people  gave  much  praise  to  Rodgers,  for 
it  was  a  cunning  thing ;  inasmuch  as  he  saved  many 
ships  that  were  riehly  laden,  so  that  they  fell  not  into  the 
kands  of  the  people,  of  Britain. 

11  Moreover,  it  happened  about  the  fifteenth  day  of 
the  seventh  month,  in  the  same  year  in  which  the  decree 
of  the  great  Sanhedrim  was  issued,  that  a  certain  vessei 
of  the  states  of  Columbia  was  environed  round  about  by 
a  multitude  of  the  ships  of  the  king. ; 

12  And  the  captain  thereof  was  straitened,  and  he 
looked  around  him  and  strove  to  escape  : 

13  But  he  was  entrapped  and  fell  a  prey  to  the  vessels" 
of  the  king;  howbeit,  the  captain,  whose  name  was 
Crane,  tarnished  not  his  honor  thereby. 

14  And  the  name  of  tha  vessel  of  the  United  States 
was  called  Nautilus. 

15  Now,  about  this  time,  there  was  a  law  sent  forth 
from  the  great  Sanhedrim,  commanding  all  servants  and 
subjects  of  the  king  of  Britain  forthwith  to  depart  be- 
yond the  swellings  of  the  waters  of  the  great  deep ;  eveu 
two  score  miles. 

16  And  they  did  so ;  and  their  friends  from  whom 
they  were  compelled  to  flee,  mourned  for  them  many  days. 


WAR. 


CHAP  VI 


HutPs  expedition — he  enters    Canada,  and  encamps  at 
Sandwich — issues  his  Proclamation — retreats  to  Detroit, 


N. 


OW  it  was  known  throughout  tl:e  land  Gf  Columbia 
that  war  was  declarer!  agaiiibt  the  kingdom  cf  Briu.h.. 
2  And  to  a  certain  chief  captain  culLd  $?&&&}, 
whose  sir-name  was  Hull,  was  given  in  trust  a  band  of 
more  than  two  thousand  chosen  men,  to  go  forth  to  bat* 
tie  in  the  north. 

'  3  Now  Hull  was  a  man  well  stricken  in  years,  and  h* 
had  been  a  captain  in  the  host  of  Columbia,  in  the  days 
that  tried  men's  souls ;  even  in  the  days  of  Washington. 

4  Therefore,  when  he  appeared  in  the  presence  of  the 
great  Sanhedrim,  they  were  pleased  with  his  counte- 
nance, and  put  mach  faith  in. him.* 

5  Moreover,  he  was  a  governor  in  the  north,f  and  a 
man  of  great  wealth. 

C  And  when  he  arrived  with  his  army  hard  by  tlse 
■•Miami  of  the  Lakes,  he  gat  him  a  vessel  and  placed 
therein  those  things  which  were  appertaining  unto  the 
preservation  of  the  lives  of  the  sick  aud  the  maimed. 

7  But,  in  an  evil  hour,  the  vessel  was  ensnared,  nea,r 
unto  a  strong  hold,|  beside  a  river  called  in  the  language 
of  the  Gauls,  Detroit. 

*  Gen.  Hull  had  been  to  Washington  and  obtained  an 
appointment  previous  to  tkt  tear. 

t  Michigan  territeri/.  $  Maiden. 


&4  LATE 

8  And  the  army  of  Columbia  suffered  much  thereby. 

9  Nevertheless,  on  the  twelfth  of  the  seventh  month 
about  the  fourth  watch  of  the  night,  William  with  his 
whole  host  crossed  the  river  which  is  called  Detroit. 

10  And  he  encamped  his  men  round  about  the  town 
of  Sandwich  in  the  province  of  the  king. 

11  From  this  place,  he  seiit  forth  a  proclamation, 
which  the  great  Sanhedrim  had  prepared  for  him  ;  and 
the  wisdom  thereof  appeareth  even  unto  this  day. 

12  But  if  a  man's  ass  falleth  into  a  ditch,  shall  the 
master  suffer  thereby  ?  if  injury  can  be  prevented,  shall 
we  not  rather  with  tnir  might  en^eaveur  to  help  him  ? 

13  Now  in  the  proclamation  which  Hull  published 
abroad,  he  invited  the  people  of  the  province  of  Canada  to 
join  themselves  to  the  host  of  Columbia,  who  were  come 
to  drive  the  servants  of  the  king  from  their  borders. 

14  And  it  came  to  pass,  that  a  great  multitude  flock- 
ed to  the  banners  of  the  great  Sanhedrim. 

15  Nevertheless,  they  knew  not  that  they  were  to  be 
•entrapt. 

16  However,  it  was  so,  that  William  departed  from 
the  province  of  the  king,  and  re-crossed  the  river. 

17  And  when  the  husbandmen  of  the  province  of 
Canada,  who  had  joined  the  standard  of  Columbia,  learn- 
ed those  things,  they  wept  bitterly ;  for  they  were  left 
behind. 

1 S  After  this  William  Secured  himself  in  the  strong 
nold  of  Detroit ;  and  the  eyes  of  the  men  and  the  wo- 
men of  Columbia  were  fixed  upon  him. 

19  And  the  expectation  thereof  may  be  likened  unto 
a  man  who  hath  watered  well  his  'vineyard. 


WAR.  25 


CHAP.  VII. 

HulVs  expedition — surrender  of  his  army  and  the  whole 
Michigan  Territory — his  trial  and  pardon  by  the 
President — capture  of  MichilimachmmcJc. 


OW  the  host  of  tfei  king  were  few  in  numbers^ 
nevertheless,  they  came  in  battle  array  against  the  strong 
hold  of  William. 

2  And  when  he  beheld  them  'from  afar,  he  was  afraid  ; 
his  knees  smote  one  against  another,  and  his  heart  sunk 
within  him ;  for,  lo  !  the  savages  of  the  wilderness  ap- 
peared amongst  them. 

3  And  there  was  a  rumor  went  throughout  the  camp 
•ef  Columbia,  and  it  bore  hard  upon  William. 

4  Inasmuch  as  they  said  the  wickedness  of  his  heart 
Was  bent  on  giving  up  the  strong  hold  to  the  servants  of 
the  king. 

5  Howbeit  he  was  not  taxed  with  drinking  of  the 
strong  waters  of  Jamaica ;  which,  when  they  enter  into 
the  head  of  a  man,  destroy  his  reason  and  make  him  ap« 
pear  like  unto  one  who  hath  lost  his  senses. 

6  And  when  the"  charge  against  William  was  made 
known  unto  the  soldiers  of  Columbia,  they  were  grieved 
much,  for  they  were  brave  men,  and  feared  nought. 

7  So  the  officers  communed  one  with  another  touch- 
ing the  thing  ;  but  they  wist  not  what  to  do. 

8  And  they  fain  would  have  done  violence  unto  Wil- 
liam, tliat  they  might  have  been  enabled  to  pour  forth 
their  thunders  against  the  approaching  host  of  Britain  • 
which  he  had  forbidden  to  be  done. 

c2 


&  LAf£ 

9  Moreover,  the  names  of  these  valiant  men,  who 
were  compelled  to  weep  before  the  cowardice  of  William, 
are  they  not  recorded  in  the  bosom  of  every  friend  of  Co- 
lumbian liberty.* 

10  And  it  was  about  the  sixteenth  of  the  eighth  month 
when  the  servants  of  the  king  appeared  before  the  strong 
hold  of  Detroit. 

1 1  And  the  name  of  the  chief  captain  of  the  province 
of  Canada,  that  came  agsinst  the  strong  hold,  was 
Brock,  whose  whole  force  was  about  seven  hundred  sol- 
diers of  the  king,  and  as  many  savages. 

12  Now  when  the  soldiers  of  Canada  were  distant 
about"  a  '  furlong,  moving  towards  the  stronghold;  even 
when  the  destroying  engines  were  ready  to  utter  their 
thunders  and  smite  them  to  the  earth ; 

13  William,  whose  heart  failed  him,  commanded  the 
Valiant  men  of  Columbia  to  bow  down  before  the  ser- 
vants of  therking. 

14  And  he  ordered  them  to  yield  up  the  destructive 
weapons  which  they  held  in  their  hands. 

""15  Neither  could  they  appear  in  battle  against  the 
kihg  again  for  many  days. 

16  Moreover,  the  cowardice  of  his  heart  caused  him 
to  make  a  league  with  the  -servants  of  the  king,  in  the 
which  he  gave  unto  them  the  whole  territory  over  which 
the  people  had  entrusted  him  to  preside ;  notwithstand- 
ing it  appertained  not  uflto  him. 

17  And  the  balls  of  solid  iron,  and  the  black  dust,and  the 
destroying  engines  became  a  prey  unto  the  men  of  Britain. 

1 8  Now  there  had  followed  after  William  a  band  of 
brave  men  from  the  west,  and  the  name  of  their  captain 

*  Miller,  Cass,  M  Arthur,  Brush,  Findley,  #c 


v,  'is  Brush;   and  he  had  intrust  "the  bread  and  the  wine 
which  were  to  refresh  the  army  of  Columbia. 

1 9  And,  lest  they  should  fall  into  the  hands  of  the 
savages,  a  captain,  whose  name  was  Vanhorn,  was  or- 
dered to  go  forth  and  meet  him. 

20  And  the  band  that  went  forth,  were  entrapped  at 
Erownstown,  by  the  cunning  savages,  that  laid  wait  for 
them ;  and  the  killed  and  the  wounded  of  Columbia, 
were  about  two  score. 

21  And  again  there  were  sent  from  the  camp  of  Wil- 
liam more  than  five  hunched  men  to  go  to  the  aid  of  Brush. 

22  And  the  name  of  the  chief  captain  thereof,  was 
Miller  ;  and  the  captain  whom  he  ordered  to  go  before 
him  was  ceiled  Snelling.* 

23  Now  Snelling  was  a  valiant  man,  and  strove  hard 
against  the  men  of  Britain,  and  the  savages  3  even  until 
Miller  the  chief  captain  arrived. 

24  And  the  place  which  is  called  Maguago,  lieth  about 
an  hunched  furlongs  from  Detroit. 

25  Now  the  battle  waxed  hot ;  and  the  host  of  Miller 
pressed  hard  upon  the  savages  and  upon  the  men  of 
Britain. 

26  Inasmuch  as  they  were  compelled  to  flee  before  the 
arms  of  Columbia :  and  Miller  gat  great  honor  thereby. 

27  And  there  fell  of  the  men  of  Britain  that  day  an 
-hundred  two  score  and  ten. 

28  Nevertheless,  in  the  league  which  William  had  made, 
he  had  included  Miller,  and  all  the  brave  captains  and 
he  men  of  war  of  Columbia  that  were  nigh  the  place. 

29  Now,  therefore,  whether  it   was   cowardice  out- 

*  Coh  Miller  and  Col.  Snelling. 


^28  LATE 

right,  in  William,  or  whether  he  became  treacherous  for 
filthy  lucre's  sake,  appeareth  not  unto  the  scribe.* 

30  But  the  effect  thereof  to  the  nation,  was  as  a  man 
having  a  millstone  cast  about  his  neck. 

3.1  So  William  and  his  whole  army  fell  into  the  hands 
*  of  the  servants  of  the  king. 

'32  But,  as  it  is  written  in  the  book  of  Solomon,  There 
is  a  time  for  all  things ;  so  it  came  to  pass,  afterward^ 
-that  William  was  called  to  account  for  his  evil  deeds. 

33  And  he  was  examined  before  the  lawful  tribunal  of 
-Ms  country;  and  they  were  all  valiant  warriors  and 

chief  captains  in  the  land  of  Columbia. 

34  Howbeit,  when  the  council!  had  weighed  well  the 
matter,  they  declared  him  guilty  of  treason,  and  that  he 
should  suffer  death. 

35  Nevertheless'^  they  recommended  him  to  the  mercy 
of  James,  the  chief  governor  of  the  land  of  Columbia, 

36  Saying,  Lo!  the  wickedness  of  the  man  appeareth 
anto  us  as  palpable  as  the  noon  day ; 

*  'To  palliate  Hull's  conduct,  it  hag  been  urged  that 
he  surrendered  his  -army  to  prevent  the  effusion  of 
blood:  "but  let  us  ask  those  charitable  "p^.lliators  what 
they  would  have  said  of  Gen.  Jackson,  if,  ichen  a 
mighty  and  a  blood-tlursty  enemy  appeared  before  his 
battlements,  in  quest  of  beauty  and  booty,  he  had  given, 
up  N.  Orleans  and  ceded  the  Louisiana  territori/  to 
him  ?  or  of  the  gallant  Croghan,  when  left  to  defend 
fort  Stephenson  with  a  handful  of  men  and  a  single  six 
pounder? — These  palliators  might  even  have  wished 
that  the  heroes  of  Erie  and  Champlain  had  felt  the 
same  qualms  of  conscience  : — but  they  ought  to  know 
that  it  was  such  noble  deeds  that  stopt  the  "  effusion  cf 
blood." 

f  Coupt-Martial. 


WAR.  29 

37  But  the  infirmities  of  his  age  have  weakened  his 
-understanding ;  therefore  let  his  grey  hairs  go  down  to 
the  grave  in  silence. 

38  And  when  James  heard  the  words  of  the  council, 
his  heart  melted  as  wax  before  the  fire. 

39  And  he  said,  Lo  !  ye  have  done  that  which  seem- 
eih  right  unto  me. 

40  And  although,  as  my  soul  hopeth  for  mercy,  for  this 
thing  William  shall  not  surely  die ;  yet  his  name  shall 
be  blotted  out  from  the  list  of  the  brave. 

41  Notwithstanding  this,  William  thanked  him  not, 
but  Sdded  insult  to  cowardice.* 

42  So  William  was  orderded  to  depart  to  the  land 
which  lieth  in  the  east,t  where  he  remaineth  unto  this 
day :  and  his  name  shall  be  no  more  spoken  rf  with  re- 
verence amongst  men. 

43  Moreover,  there  was  another  evil  which  fell  upon 
the  people  of  the  United  States,  about  the  time  the  host 
of  Columbia  crossed  the  river  Detroit. 

44  For,  lo  !  the  strong  hold  'of  Michilimackinack, 
which  lieth  nigh  unto  the  lakes  of  Michigan  and  Huron, 
fell  an  easy  prey  unto  the  men  of  Britain  and  their  red 
brethren ; 

45  Whose  numbers  were  more  than  four-fold  greater 
than  the  men  of  Columbia,  who  knew  not  of  the  war. 

46  Nevertheless,  the  people  of  the  United  States, 
pveR  the  great  Sanhedrim,  were  not  disheartened ;  nei- 
ther were  they  afraid  :  for  they  had  counted  the  cost,  and 
wTere  prepared  to  meet  the  evil. 


*  HulVs  address  to  the  public,     t  Massachusetts, 


LATE 


CHAP.  VIII. 


Capture  of  the  British  frigate  Guerriere.,  by  the  United 
State's  frigate  Constitution,  captain  Hull — capture 
cf  the  Alert  sloop  of  war,  by  the  Essex,  captain 
Porter. 


N< 


OW  it  came  to  pass,  on  the  nineteenth  day  of  the 
eighth  month,  that  one  of  the  tall  ships  of  Columbia, 
called  the  Constitution,  commanded  by  Isaac,  whose  sir- 
name  vv.as  Hull, 

2  Havre  g  spread  her  white  wings  on  the  bosom  of  the 
mighty  deep,  beheld  from  afar  one  of  the  fighting  ships 
of  Britain  bearing  the  royal  cross. 

3  And  the  name  of  the  ship  was  called,  in  the  lan- 
guage of  the  French,  Guerriere,*  which  signifieth  a  war- 
rior, and  Dacres  was  the  captain  thereof. 

4  Now  when  Dacres  beheld  the  ship  of  Columbia 
his  eyes  sparkled  with  joy,  for  he  had  defied  the  vessels 
©f  Columbia. 

5  And  he  spake  unto  his  officers  and  his  men  that 
were  under  him,  saying, 

6  Let  every  man  be  at  his  post,  and  ere  the  glass  hath 
passed  the  third  part  of  an  hour  the  stripes  of  the  Con- 
stitution shall  cease  to  sweep  the  air  of  heaven, 

7  And  the  yawning  deep  shall  open  its  mouth  to  re- 
ceive the  enemies  of  the  king. 


*  The  Guerriere  was  taken  from  the  French  by  the 

British. 


WAR.  32 

3"  And  the  men  of.  Dacres  shouted  aloud,  and  drank 
of  the  strong  waters  of  Jamaica,  which  make  men  mad  j 
moreover,  they  mixed  the  black  dust  therewith. 

9  Now  when  Isaac  drew  nigh  unto  the  king's  ship,  the 
warriors  of  Columbia  shouted. 

10  And  Isaac  bore  down  upon  the  strong  ship  of  the 
king. 

11  About  this  time  they  put  the  lighted  match  to  the-, 
black  dust  of  the  destroying  engines,  and  it  was  like  unto 
a  clap  of  thunder. 

12  Moreover,  the  fire  and  smoke  issued  out  of  the 
mouths  of  the  engines  in  abundance,  so  as  to  darken  the 
air,  and  they  were  overshadowed  by  the  means  there- 
of. 

13  Now  the  black  dust  was  not  known  among  the  an.- 
•cients ;  even  Solomon,  in  the  plenitude  of  his  wisdom  j 
knew  it  not. 

14  And  the  battle  continued  with  tremendous  roar 
for  about  the  space  of  half  an  hour,  when  its  noises 
ceased. 

15  But  when  the  clouds  of  smoke  had  passed  away, 
behold  !  the  mighty  Guerriere  lay  a  sinking  wreck  upon 
the  face  of  the  waters. 

16  The  shadow  of  hope  passed  over  her  as  a  dream  ; 
and  most  reluctantly  was  she  compelled  to  strike  the 
Eon's  red  cross  to  the  Eagle  of  Columbia  : 

17  Whilst  the  Constitution,  like  Shadrach  in  the 
fiery  furnace,  remaining  unsinged,  filled  her  white 
sails,  and  passed  along  as  though  nothing  had  happened 
unto  her. 

18  Now  the  slain  and  the  maimed  of  the  king  that  daj 
were  five  score  and  five. 


92  LATE 

19  And  the  loss  of  the  people  of  Columbia,  was  se- 
ven slain  and  seven  wounded. 

20  After  this  Isaac  caused  a  burning  coal  to  be  placed 
in  the  Guerriere,  that  she  might  be  consumed,  and  the 
flames  thereof  mounted  towards  the  heavens. 

21  And  the  great  Sanhedrim  honored  Isaac  with 
great  honor,  and  the  people  were  rejoiced  in  him,  and 
they  forgat,  in  the  contemplation  of  his  glory,  the  evils 
which  had  befallen  them  in  the  north. 

22  But  when  the  lords  and  counsellors  of  Britain 
heard  those  things,  they  believed  them  not ;  it  was  as 
the  bitterness  of  gall  to  their  souls  :  for  the  pride  of 
Britain  was,  fixed  upon  her  navy  ;  it  was  the  apple  of 
hei  eye. 

23  Now,  as  one  evil  folio weth  after  another  to  the 
sons  of  men,  so  it  happened  that,  in  the  same  month,  a 
certain  strong  ship  of  the  United  States,  even  the  Es- 
sex, the  name  of  the  captain  whereof  was  Porter,  sailed 
\n  search  of  the  vessels  of  the  king,  on  the  waters  of  the 
ocean. 

24  And  in  process  of  time,  she  fell  upon  one  of  the 
ships  of  Britain,  called  the  Alert,  and  made  spoil  thereof 
to  the  people  of  Columbia. 


WAR.  53 


CHAP.  IX. 


Attack  on  Saclcefs  Harbour — affair  of  Ogdensburgh 
— British  drove  from  St.  Regis,  by  the  Troy  militia 
under  major  Young — the  brigs  Adams  and  Caledo- 
nia re-captured  by  capt.  Elliot,  near  fort  Erie. 


1 


OYV  the  movements  of  the  enemy  were  as  the 
motion  of  a  whirlwind,  which  passeth  from  the  north  to 
the  south,  and  from  the  east  to  the  west. 

2  And  they  sought  to  encompass  the  whole  land  of 
Columbia  round  about. 

3  So  it  came  to  pass,  that  a  number  of  the  armed  ves- 
sel of  the  king,  that  sailed  on  the  great  lake  which  is 
called  Ontario,  moved  towards  Sachet's  Harbour. 

4  And  they  demanded  certain  vessels  of  the  people 
of  the  United  States,  which  they  had  taken  from  the 
king,  to  be  given  up  unto  them,  saying, 

5  Verily,  if  ye  give  them  not  up,  then  will  we  lay  a 
contribution  upon  you,  and  ye  shall  pay  tribute. 

6  But  Bellinger,  the  ehief  captain  of  the  Harbour, 
refused. 

7  And  whea  the  vessels  of  the  king  were  hard  by,  a 
certain  captain,  whose  name  was  Woolsey,  set  one  of  the 
engines  to  work. 

8  And  the  vessels  of  the  king  also  opened  the  mouths 
pf  their  engines,  and  shot  into  the  camp  of  Columbia. 

9  And  the  number  of  the  husbandmen  of  the  United 

D 


34  LATE 

States  that  flocked  to  the  defence  of  the   Harbour  was 
about  three  thousand. 

10  And  when  the  men  of  war  of  Britain  saw  that  the 
people  of  Columbia  were  not  afraid,  and  that  they  knew 
to  use  the  destroying  engines,  they  fled  to  their  strong 
hold,  in  the  province  of  the  king,  which  is  called  Kings- 
ton. 

11  Howbeit,  some  of  their  ships  received  much  dam- 
age from  the  balls  of  heavy  metal,  that  smote  them  from 
the  strong  hold. 

12  Now  as  the  malice  of  the  nations  increased  one 
against  another,  so  did  the  evils  increase  which  surround- 
ed them. 

13  And  it  came  to  pass,  on  the  fourth  day  of  the 
tenth  month,  there  came  a  thousand  fighting  men  of 
Britain  to  lay  waste  the  village  of  Ogdensburgh,  which 
lieth  hard  by  the  river  St.  Lawrence. 

14  Howbeit,  the  people  of  Columbia  permitted  them 
not  to  come  unto  the  land  ;  but  compelled  them  to  depart 
in  haste. 

15  Nigh  unto  this  pkce  is  a  village  which  is  called 
St.  Regis,  where  the  soldiers  of  Britain  had  come  to  fix 
a  strong  hold  on  the  borders  of  Columbia. 

16  But  a  brave  captain,  whose  name  was  Young, 
with  a  band  of  men,  called  militia,   went  against  them. 

17  And  he  set  the  destroying  engines  to  work,  and  the 
noise  thereof  sounded  in  their  ears  j  so  they  were  discom- 
£tted  and  fled  in  confusion. 

18  And  the  number  of  the  servants  of  the  king, 
made  captive  that  day,  was  two  score  men,  with  the  in- 
struments of  destruction  in  their  hands. 

19  Moreover,  one  of  the  banners  of  the  king,  even 


WAR.  35 

the  red-cross  standard  of  Britain,  fell  into  the  hands  of 
Young. 

20  On  the  eighth  day  of  the  same  month,  a  captain 
of  Columbia,  whose  name  was  Elliot,  a  cunning  man, 
took  a  chosen  band,  who  came  from  the  sea-coast,  and 
put  them  in  boats. 

21  And  he  departed  with  them  from  Niagara  towards 
the  strong  hold  of  Erie,  even  in  the  dead  of  the  night. 

22  And  he  cams  unawarc3  upon  the  two  vessels 
which  were  covenanted  to  the  king,  with  the  army  At 
Detroit. 

23  And  the  names  of  the  vessels  were  the  Adams 
and  the  Caledonia,  and  Elliot  captured  them  the  same 
night. 

24  However,  the  next  day,  as  Elliot  and  his  men 
were  returning  with  their  prizes,  the  men  of  Britain, 
who  were  upon  the  other  shore,  let  the  destroying  engines 
loose  upon  them  from  their  strong  hold  ; 

25  And  a  few  of  the  people  of  Columbia  were  slain. 
It  was  here  the  valiant  Cuyler*  fell ;  a  ball  of  heavy 
metal  struck  him  as  he  was  coming  oa  a  fleet  horse  to- 
wards the  water's  edge. 

26  Now,  Cuyler  was  a  man  well  beloved ;  and  the 
officers  and  men  of  Columbia  grieved  for  him  many 
days. 


*  Major  Cuyler  of  N.  Jersey, 


36  LATE 


CHAP.  X. 

Battle  of    Queenstown — the    British    General  Brock 
killed. 


A: 


-ND  it  came  to  pass,  on  the  morning  of  the  thir- 
teenth day  of  the  tenth  month, 

2  That  Stephen,  a  chief  captain  of  Columbia,  sir- 
named  Van  Rensselaer,  essayed  to  cross  the  river  which 
is  called  Niagara,  with  his  whole  army. 

3  Now  the  river  lieth  between  the  Lake  Erie  and  the 
Lake  Ontario. 

4  And  the  noise  of  the  waters  of  the  river  is  louder 
than  the  roaring  of  the  forest ;  yea,  it  is  like  unto  the 
rushing  of  mighty  armies  to  battle. 

5  And  the  movement  of  the  stupendous  falls  there- 
of bringetli  the  people  from  all  parts  of  the  earth  to  be- 
hold it.* 

6  So  Stephen  gat  his  soldiers  into  the  boats  that  were 
prepared  for  them,  and  they  moved  upon  the  rough 
waters  of  the  river,  towards  the  strong  hold  of  Queens- 
town. 

7  And  when  the  men  of  Britain  saw  them  approach, 
they  opened  the  engines  upon  them,  from  Fort  George, 
and  round  about. 

8  Nevertheless,  they  persevered ;  although  the  strength 
©f  the  waters,  which  were  ungovernable,  separated  the 
army. 

9  However,  Solomon,t  a  captain  and  a  kinsman  of 

*  Niagara  Falls,     i  Col.  Solomon  Fan  Rensselaer. 


WAR.  37 

Stephen,  reached  the  shore  with  the  men  under  his  coin > 
mand,  in  all  about  two  hundred. 

10  And  he  put  the  army  in  battle  array,  in  a  valley, 
and  moved  up  towards  the  strong  hold ;  and  Brock  was 
the  chief  captain  of  the  host  of  Britain. 

11  And  from  their  strong  hold  they  shot,  with  their 
mischievous  engines,  balls  of  lead  in  abundance  ;  and  it 
was  as  a  shower  of  hail  upon  the  people  of  Columbia ; 

12  For  there  was  no  turning  to  the  right  hand  nor  to 
the  left  for  safety. 

13  And  Solomon  and  his  men  fought  hard;  and  they 
rushed  into  the  hottest  of  the  battle. 

14  And  a  captain  of  the  United  States,  whose  name 
was  Chrystie,  followed  close  after  them,  with  a  chosen 
band  of  brave  men. 

15  So  they  pushed  forward  to  the  strong  hold,  and 
drove  the  men  of  Britain  before  them  like  sheep,  and 
smote  them  hip  and  thigh  with  great  slaughter ;  and 
Brock,  their  chief  captain,  was  among  the  slain. 

lG  And  Chrystie,  and  the  valiant  Wool,  and  Ogil- 
vie,  and  the  host  of  Columbia,  got  into  the  hold,  and  the 
army  of  the  king  fled :  and  Chrystie  was  wounded  in 
the  palm  of  his  hand. 

17  But  Solomon  was  sorely  wounded,  so  that  his 
strength  failed  him,  and  he  went  not  into  the  hold. 

1 S  And  that  day  there  fell  of  the  servants  of  the  king 
many  valiant  men,  even  those  who  were  called  Invinci- 
bles,  and  had  gained  great  honour  in  Egypt. 

1-9  Nevertheless,  the  same  day  a  mighty  host  of  sava- 
ges and  soldiers  of  the  king,*  came  forth  again  to  battle, 

*  Reinforcernentsfrom  Fo?-t  George  and  Chippmva, 
v  2 


38  LATE 

and  rushed  upon  the  people  of  the  United   States,  and 
drove  them  from  the  strong  hold  of  Queenstown. 

20  For,  lo  !  Stephen,  the  chief  captain,  could  not  pre- 
vail on  the  hosts  of  militia  on  the  othe*  side  of  the  river 
to  cross  over. 

21  So  the  army  of  Columbia  moved  down  towards 
the  river  to  cross  over  again,  that  they  might  escape. 

22  But  when  they  came  down  to  the  water  side,  lo  ! 
they  were  deceived,  for  there  was  not  a  boat  to  convey 
them  to  a  place  of  safety  j  so  they  became  captives  to  the 
men  of  Britain. 

23  Now  the  men  of  Britain  treated  the  prisoners 
kindly,  and  showed  much  tenderness  towards  them  ;  for 
which  the  people  blessed  them. 

24  And  the  killed  and  wounded  of  the  host  of  Colum- 
bia, were  an  hundred  two  score  and  ten. 

25  And  the  prisoners  that  fell  into  the  hands  of  the 
king,  were  about  seven  hundred. 

26  Nevertheless,  in  a  letter  which  Stephen  sent  to 
Henry,*  the  chief  captain  of  the  army  of  the  north,  he 
gave  great  honor  unto  the  captains  who  fought  under 
him  that  day. 

27  And  the  names  of  the  valiant  men,  who  distin- 
guished themselves  in  the  battle,  were  Wadsworth,  Van 
Rensselaer,  Scott,  Chrystie,  Fenwick,  Fink,  Gibson, 
and  many  other  brave  men  of  war. 


*  Major  Gen.  Dearborn. 


W.AR.  39 


CHAP-  XI. 

Gen.  Smyth,  succeeds  Gen.  Van  Rensselaer — his  attempt 
to  cross  the  Niagara,  andjailure — causes. 


A, 


-FTER  these  things,  on  the  same  day  in  which  the 
letter  was  written,  Stephen  resigned  the  command  of  his 
army  to  a  certain  chief  captain  whose  name  was  Alexander, 

2  Now  Alexander  was  a  man  well  skilled  in  the  arts 
of  warfare. 

3  And  he  made  a  proclamation  to  the  young  men  of 
the  state  of  New  York,  wherein  he  invited  them  to  go  forth 
from  their  homes  and  join  the  host  under  him. 

4  And  the  words  thereof  pleased  the  young  men  so 
that  they  went  in  numbers  and  joined  Alexander,  on  the 
shores  of  the  river  which  is  called  Niagara. 

5  But  here  the  hand  of  the  scribe  trembleth,  his  tongue 
faltcreth,  his  heart  sickeneth,  and  he  would  fain  blot 
from  his  memory  that  which  truth  compels  him  to  record  j 
for  he  is  a  living  witness  thereof. 

6  Alas  !  there  was  an  evil  spirit  moving  in  secret  and 
In  bye-places  throughout  the  land  of  Columbia. 

7  And  lo  !  its  viper-like  insidious ness  crept  into  the 
ears  of  the  unwary  husbandmen. 

8  For  the  sect  of  the  tories  whispered  unto  them,  say- 
ing, Lo!  the  laws  of  the  land  cannot  compel  you  to  step 
over  the  borders  the  United  States. 

*  Brig.  Gen.  Smyths 


40  LATE 

9  Moreover,  said  they,  the  fierceness  of  the  savages  is 
terrible  as  the  wild  tyger,  and  their  numbers  as  the  trees 
of  the  forest. 

10  And  the  veteran  soldiers  of  the  king,  who  have 
been  bred  to  war,  are  spread  in  multitudes  over  the  pro- 
vince of  Canada. 

11  Therefore,  if  ye  go  over  to  fight  against  them,  \e 
will  be  as  sheep  going  to  the  slaughter ;  and  ye  shall 
never  again  return  to  the  house  of  your  fathers,  for  ye 
will  be  destroyed. 

12  Even  as  the  wickedness  of  the  war,  which  the 
great  Sanhedrim  have  made  against  the  king  cannot 
prosper,  so  shall  ye  fall  a  prey  to  the  folly  thereof. 

13  And  it  came  to  pass  when  the  husbandmen  heard 
these  smooth  words,  many  of  them  were  bewildered  in 
their  minds,  and  knew  not  what  to  do. 

14  So  when  the  young  men,  who  had  flocked  to  the 
banners  of  Alexander,  came  down  to  the  waters  edge, 
to  go  into  the  boats,  they  thought  of  the  words  which 
the  enemies  of  Columbia  had  spoken  unto  them ;  and 
they  refused  to  cross  over  : 

1 5  Neither  could  the  persuasions  of  the  chief  captain 
prevail  on  them  all  to  go  into  the  boats  ;  and  those  whose 
hearts  were  willing  were  not  enough. 

16  So  he  was  obliged  to  suffer  them  to  return  to  their 
homes  ;  for  his  expectations  were  blasted. 

17  And  the  army  of  Columbia  went  into  winter 
quarters  ;  for  the  earth  was  covered  with  snow,  and  the 
waters  of  the  great  lakes,  on  the  borders  of  which  they 
had  pitched  their  tents,  were  congealed. 


WAR.  ?l 


CHAP.  XII. 


Capture  of  the  British  sloop  cf  war  Frolic,  of  22 
guns,  by  the  Uniied  States'  sloop  of  war  Wasp,  of 
1 8  giais. 


JN"< 


OW  the  strong  ships  of  war  of  the  kingdom  of 
Great  Britain  were  spread  over  the  whole  face  of  the 
•waters  of  the  ocean. 

2  But  kw,  indeed,  Were  the  vessels  ef  Columbia  that 
were  fighting  ships,  and  carried  the  destroying  engines. 

3  Howsoever,  early  in  the  morning  of  the  eighteenth 
day  of  the  tenth  month,  about  the  sixth  hour,  being  on 
the  sabbath  day, 

4  One  of  the  ships  of  Columbia,  called  the  Wasp, 
the  name  of  the  captain  whereof  was  Jones,  a  valiant 
man,  discovered  afar  off  one  of  the  strong  ships  of  the 
king. 

5  Now  the  ship  of  Britain  was  mightier  than  the 
ship  of  Columbia  j  and  she  was  called  the  Frolic,  and 
the  captain's  name  was  Whinyeates. 

6  And  they  began  to  utter  their  thunders  about  the 
eleventh  hour  of  the  day,  and  the  noises  continued  for 
more  than  the  space  of  half  an  hour  ; 

7  When  the  Wasp,  falling  upon  the  Frolic,  and  get- 
ting entangled  therewith,  the  men  struggled  together ; 


42  LATE 

and  the  mariners  of  Columbia  overpowered  the  mari- 
ners of  Britain. 

8  So  it  came  to  pass,  that  the  Frolic  became  captive 
to  the  ship  of  Columbia. 

9  And  the  slain  and  the  wounded  of  the  king's  shij 
were  about  four  score. 

10  And  the  children  of  Columbia  lost,  in  all,  abou 
half  a  score  :  howbeit,  there  was  much  damage  done  t( 
both  vessels. 

1 1  Nevertheless,  about  this  time,  a  mighty  ship  o 
Britain,  called  the  Poictiers,  came  upon  the  vessels 
which  were  in  a  defenceless  situation,  and  took  then: 
both,  and  commanded  them  to  go  to  the  island  of  th< 
king  which  is  called  Bermuda. 

12  However,  the  people  of  Columbia  were  pleasec 
with  the  noble  conduct  of  Jones,  and  for  his  valiant  act! 
they  gave  him  a  sword  of  curious  workmanship. 

13  Moreover,  while  he  remained  at  Bermuda,  th< 
inhabitants,  the  servants  of  the  king,  treated  him  kindly 
and  showed  much  respect  for  him  and  his  officers  tha; 
were  made  captive. 


WAR,  43 


CHAP.  XIII. 

Capture  of  the  British  frigate  Macedonian,  by  Com, 
Decatur,  in  the  frigate  United  States. — Brig  Vixen 
captured  by  the  British  frigate  Southampton. 


N 


OW  it  happened  on  the  twenty-fifth  day  of  the 
tenth  month,  in  the  first  year  of  the  war ;  that  a  certain 
strong  ship  of  Britain,  that  had  prepared  herself  to  fight 
a  ship  of  Columbia,  appeared  upon  the  waters  of  the 
mighty  deep. 

2  And  she  was  commanded  by  a  valiant  captain, 
whose  name  was  Carden,  and  the  name  of  the  ship  was 
the  Macedonian. 

3  And  on  the  same  day  she  met  one  of  the  strong 
ships  of  Columbia,  the  name  of  the  captain  whereof  was 
Decatur,  and  the  vessel  was  called  tbe  United  States. 

4  Now  Decatur  was  a  man  who  had  never  known 
fear  ;  and  the  good  of  his  country  was  the  pride  of  his 
heart ; 

5  And  when  he  came  towards  the  vessel  of  the  king, 
he  used  no  entreaty  with  his  men,  for  they  all  loved 
him,  and  the  motion  of  his  finger  was  as  the  word  of  his 
mouth. 

6  So  when  the  ships  came  nigh  unto  one  another, 
their  thunders  were  tremendous,  and  the  smoke  thereof 
was  as  a  black  cloud. 

7  Nevertheless,  in  the  space  of  about  ninety  minutes^ 


44  LATE 

the  strong  ship  of  Britain  struck  her  red  flag  to  the 
stripes  of  Columbia. 

8  Now  the  Macedonian  was  a  new  ship  and  she  gat 
much  damage. 

9  But  the  United  States,  like  the  companions  of 
Shadrach,  moved  unhurt  upon  the  waters ;  nay,  even 
her  wings  were  not  singed. 

10  And  the  slain  and  the  wounded,  of  the  ship  of 
the  king,  were  five  score  and  four. 

1 1  And  there  fell  of  the  people  of  Columbia  five  who 
were  slain  outright,  and  there  were  seven  maimed. 

12  Moreover  the  ship  of  Britain  had  seven  of  the 
stolen  men  of  Columbia  therein,  who  were  compelled 
to  fight  against  their  brethren  j  and  two  of  them  were 
slain  in  battle. 

13  And  when  Carden  came  on  board  the  ship  of 
Columbia,  he  bowed  his  head,  and  offered  to  put  his 
sword,  of  curious  workmanship,  into  the  hands  of  De- 
catur. 

14  But  Decatur  said  unto  him,  Nay,  thou  hast  de- 
fended thy  ship  like  a  valiant  man  ;  therefore,  keep  thy 
sword,  but  receive  my  hand. 

1 5  So  they  sat  down  aud  drank  wine  together :  for 
ihc  spirits  of  brave  men  mingle  even  in  the  time  of 
warfare. 

ifi  And  after  they  had  eaten  and  drank,  Carden  open- 
ed his  mouth,  for  he  was  troubled  in  his  mind,  and  spake 
unto  Decatur,  saying  : 

17  IjO  !  if  this  thing  which  hath  happened  be  known 
unto  the  king,  that  one  of  the  vessels  of  Britain  hath 
struck  her  flag,  and  become  captive  to  a  vessel  of  the 
United    States,  what  shall  be  done  unto  the  captain 


WAR.  45 

thereof  ?  for  such  a  thing  hath  not  been  heard  of  among 
the  nations  of  the  earth. 

18  And  Decatur  answered,  and  spake  unto  Carden, 
saying,  Verily  thou  art  deceived,  neither  will  harm  hap» 
pen  unto  thee. 

19  For,  lo  !  it  came  to  pass,  about  three  score  days 
ago,  that  one  of  the  strong  ships  of  the  king,  thy  mRstex, 
the  name  whereof  was  called  Guerriere,  fell  an  easy 
prey  to  one  of  the  strong  ships  of  Columbia  j  and  they 
burnt  her  with  fire  upon  the  waters. 

20  Now  when  Carden  heard  these  words,  his  heart 
leaped  with  joy  ;  for  he  dreaded  the  frowns  of  the  king, 
and  he  was  glad  that  he  stood  not  alone  in  the  thing. 

21  After  this,  in  the  eighteen  hundred  and  thirteenth 
year  of  the  christian  era,  on  the  first  day  of  the  first 
month  of  the  same  year,  and  on  the  sixth  day  of  the 
week, 

22  The  ship  United  States,  and  the  ship  Macedonian 
came  into  the  haven  of  New-York,  having  passed  a  cer- 
tain dangerous  place  called  Hell-gate  ;  and  there  was  a 
heavy  fog  that  day. 

23  And  there  were  great  rejoicings  in  the  city  of 
New- York,  and  throughout  the  land  of  Columbia. 

24  Moreover,  there  was  a  sumptuous  dinner  given  to 
Isaac,  Decatur,  and  Jones,  in  honor  of  their  valiant 
deeds ;  and  the  number  of  the  guests  were  about  five 
hundred. 

25  And  the  inhabitants  of  New- York  made  a  great 
feast,  on  the  ninth  day  of  the  month,  for  the  brave  mari- 
ners that  wrought  in  the  ship  of  Columbia. 

26  And  they  became  merry  with   the  drinking  of 

E 


46  LATE 

wine ;  after  which  they  departed  and  went  into  a  house 
of  mirth  and  gaiety.* 

27  Now,  it  is  written  in  the  words  of  Solomon,  whose 
wisdom  hath  not  been  excelled,  that,  there  is  a  time  to 
weep,  and  a  time  to  rejoice. 

28  Not  many  days  after  those  things,  it  came  to 
pass,  thai  the  hearts  of  the  lords  and  the  counsellors  of 
Britain  were  rejoiced. 

29  For  a  certain  mighty  ship,  called  the  Southamp- 
ton, fell  upon  a  smaller  vessel  of  the  United  States,! 
and  made  capture  thereof  unto  the  king. 

30  But  the  storm  arose,  and  the  sea  beat  upon  the 
vessels,  and  they  were  cast  away,  and  they  parted  asun- 
der, upon  an  island  which  lieth  far  to  the  south,  and  both 
vessels  were  lost. 


*  Theatre. 

t  United  States'  brig,  Vixen,  12  guns,  G.  W.  Reed, 
wmmander. 


WAR.  47 


CUM*.  XIV. 

Affairs  in  the  north — skirmishes — battle  of  Frencht6U'ns 
on  the  river  Raisin — capture  of  Gen.  Winchesters 
army — massacre  of  American  prisoners. 


OW  it  came  to  pass,  that  the  wickedness  of  Brftaim 
had  roused  up  the  spirit  of  Satan  in  the  savages  of  the 
forest,  in  the  north  and  in  the  west. 

2  And  the  tomahawk  and  the  scalping  knife  were 
raised  against  the  people  of  Columbia  on  the  borders  of 
the  great  lakes. 

3  So  the  people  sought  after  a  valiant  man  to  go 
against  the  savages  and  the  men  of  Britain. 

4  And  they  pitched  upon  a  certain  governor  of  one  of 
the  states  in  the  west,  whose  name  was  Harrison,*  and 
the  great  Sanhedrim  made  him  a  chief  captain  of  the 
army. 

5  Moreover,  he  was  beloved  by  the  people,  and  a 
mighty  host  of  husbandmen  were  ready  to  follow  after 
him. 

6  And  Harrison  rested  his  army  at  the  strong  hold  of 
Meigs,  nigh  the  Miami  Rapids,  which  lieth  in  the  way 
journeying  towards  the  strong  hold  of  Maiden,  which  is 
in  the  province  of  the  Icing ;  whither  he  intended  to  go 
forth  in  the  pleasant  season  of  the  year. 


Mnj.  Gen.  W.  H.  Barrison,  Governor  of  Ohw, 


48  LATE 

7  And  Winchester*  was  another  chief  captain  that 
went  against  the  savages. 

8  Now  the  savages  had  been  a  sore  thorn  in  the  side 
of  the  people  of  Columbia. 

9  They  had  assailed  the  hold  which  is  called  after  a 
chief  captain,  whose  name  was  Dearborn,  and  their  num- 
bers overpowered  it,  and  they  used  deceit,  and  put  to 
tleath  the  men,  and  the  women,  and  the  infants  that  were 
found  in  the  hold,  after  they  had  become  captives,  save 
about  half  a  score. 

10  And  their  bowlings  along  the  dark  forest  were 
more  terrible  than  the  wild  wolf,  and  their  murderous 
cunning  more  dreadful  than  the  prowling  tyger. 

1 1  And  the  servants  of  the  king  gave  them  to  drink 
of  the  strong  waters  of  Jamaica,  well  knowing  that  they 
loved  A  as  they  did  their  own  souls. 

12  These  were  the  allies,  the  messmates,  the  com- 
panions of  the  soldiers  of  Britain  !  hired  assassins. 

13  However,  about  this  time  there  were  many  brave 
captains  of  the  people  of  the  United  States  that  went 
against  them. 

14  Even  Russel,  and  Hopkins,  and  Tupper,  and 
Campbell,  and  Williams,  and  others,  who  drove  the  red 
savages  before  them, 

15  And  burnt  their  villages,*  and  laid  waste  their 
habitations,  and  slew  many  of  them  ;  for  it  is  written  in 
the  holy  scripture,  Blood  for  blood  ! 

16  Nevertheless,  they  treated  the  savage  prisoners 
who  fell  into  their  hands  kindly  j  neitner  suffered  they 
the  people  to  buffet  them  ! 

17  But  it  came  to  pass,  on  the  twenty-second  (jay  of 

*  Brig.  Ceii.  Winchester. 


WAR.  49 

the  first  month,  that  a  mighty  horde  of  savages,  and  ser- 
vants of  the  king,  fell  upon  the  army  of  Winchester  the 
chief  captain. 

IS  And  it  was  about  the  dawning  of  the  day,  when 
the  destructive  engines  opened  their  fires. 

19  And  the  place  where  the  battle  was  fought  was 
called,  in  the  vernacular  tongue,  Frenchtown,  which 
lieth  on  the  south  side  of  the  River  Raisin,  nigh  unto 
Lake  Eric. 

20  Now  the  name  of  the  chief  captain  of  the  army 
of  Britain  was  Proctor,  and  he  proved  himself  a  wicked 
man,  and  his  name  is  despised  even  unto  this  day. 

21  And  when  the  battle  waxed  hot,  and  they  began  to 
rush  one  upon  another  with  great  violence, 

22  The  small  band  of  Columbia  fought  desperately, 
and  the  slaughter  was  dreadful :  and  the  pure  snow  of 
heaven  was  sprinkled  and  stained  with  the  blood  of 
men ! 

23  Nevertheless,  the  people  of  the  United  States 
were  overcome,  and  their  chief  captain  made  prisoner. 

24  So  when  Winchester  found  he  was  made  captive, 
and  that  there  was  no  hope  for  the  rest  of  the  men  under 
his  command,  he  made  a  league  with  Proctor,  the  chief 
captain  of  the  host  of  the  king. 

25  In  the  which  Proctor  agreed  to  vouchsafe  protec- 
tion to  the  captive  men  of  Columbia,  from  the  wrath  of 
the  savages,  whom  he  had  inflamed. 

26  Now  the  number  of  the  men  of  Columbia  that 
fell  into  their  hands  that  day,  were  about  five  hundred  ; 
and  the  slain  and  wounded  about  an  hundred  two  score 
and  ten. 

E  2 


50  LATE 

27  And  the  number  of  the  savages  and  the  men-  of 
Britain  who  fell  in  battle  that  day  were  many. 

28  And  Proctor  removed  the  captives  unto  the  strong 
hold  of  Maiden,  which  lieth  upon  the  opposite  side  of 
the  river,  iu  the  province  of  the  king. 

29  But,  in  the  cruelty  of  his  heart,  he  left  the  sick, 
the  wounded,  and  the  dying  to  the  mercy  of  the  savages 
of  the  wilderness  ! 

30  In  this  thing  he  transgressed  the  word  he  had 
pledged,  which  is  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord. 

3 1  Oh  !  for  a  veil  to  hide  in  utter  darkness  the  hor- 
rid deeds  of  that  awful  day,  that  they  might  not  be 
handed  down  to  the  children  of  men,  in  the  times  to 
come. 

32  Lo  1  early  in  the  morning  of  the  next  day,  -ere 
the  sun  had  risen,  the  work  of  death  began  ! 

33  Behold  the  sullen  savage,  with  deadly  rage,  drag 
forth  the  shivering  soldier  over  the  blood-stained  snow 
fainting,  bleeding  with  his  wounds,  and  imploring  on  his 
knees  for  mercy. 

34  Alas !  the  savage  understandeth  not  his  words ; 
but  giveth  him  a  blow  with  the  hatchet  of  death. 

35  For  have  not  the  counsellors  of  Britain  said,  For 
this  will  we  give  unto  you  silver  and  gold  ? 

36  Thus  were  the  poor  wounded  prisoners  of  Co- 
lumbia slaughtered  in  abundance. 

37  And  Round-Head,  the  chief  captain  of  the  war- 
riors, and  the  savages  under  him,  gat  great  praise  from 
Proctor,  the  chief  captain  of  the  host  of  Britain.* 

38  Neither  did  the  sick  and  wounded  escape,  wh» 


See  Proctor's  account,  dated  Quebec,  Feb.  8, 18.13. 


WAR.  51 

had  gathered  themselves  together  in  the  houses,  that 
they  might  be  sheltered  from  the  piercing  cold ;  even 
those  who  were  weary  and  unable  to  go  forth. 

39  For  the  savages  put  the  burning  brand  to  the 
houses,  from  which  they  could  not  flee,  and  burnt  them 
to  death  therein. 

40  And  the  flames  and  the  smoke  arose  ;  and  their 
cries  and  their  groans  reached  the  high  chancery  of 
heaven, 

41  Where  they  will  stand  recorded,  until  the  coming 
of  that  day  for  which  all  other  days  were  made. 

42  Lo !  these  were  the  helpmates  of  the  mighty 
kingdom  of  Britain,  that  noble  and  generous  nation, 
the  bulwark  of  religion  ! 

43  Tell  it  not  in  Gath ;  publish  it. not  in  the  streets  of 
Askelon.* 


*  The  whole,  of  this  massacre  was  conducted  under  the 
eyes  of  the  British  officers,  and  sanctioned  by  them  as 
well  as  by  their  government ;  this  fact  has  never  been 
disavowed. 


LATE 


CHAP.  XV. 

Capture  of  the  British  frigate  Java,  by  the    United 
States  frigate  Constitution. 


N  the  twelfth  month  of  the  first  year  of  the  decree 
©f  the  great  Sanhedrim,  on  the  twenty  and  ninth  day  of 
the  month, 

2  It  came  to  pass,  that  one  of  the  strong  ships  of  the 
king  had  approached  the  country  of  the  south,  which 
iieth  many  thousand  miles  off. 

3  And  the  ship  was  called  Java,  after  one  of  the 
sweet  scented  islands  of  the  east ;  where  the  poppy 
flourishes,  where  the  heat  of  the  sun  is  abundant,  and 
where  the  Bohon  Upas  emits  its  deadly  poison. 

4  Moreover,  she  carried  about  four  hundred  and  fifty 
men,  and  a  governor,*  and  many  officers  and  soldiers  of 
the  king ;  and  she  was  well  prepared  for  battle. 

5  And  Lambert  commanded  the  ship  of  Britain,  and 
he  was  a  brave  and  valiant  man. 

6  So,  as  he  passed  along,  nigh  unto  the  coast  of  Brazil, 
•where  the  sun  casteth  the  shadow  of  a  man  to  the  south 
at  noon  day : 

7  (A  place  unknown  to  the  children  of  Israel,  in  the 
-days  of  Moses) 

8  Lo !  one  of  the  tall  ships  of  Columbia,  even  the 
Constitution,  beheld  her    when  she   was  yet  a  great 

*  Gov,  H.yslop}  and  mitei  bound  to  Bombay. 


WAR.  53 

way  off,  and  made  signs  unto  her  which  she  answered 
not ; 

9  Which  caused  the  gallant  captain,  whose  sir-name 
was  Cambridge,*  to  cast  a  shot  towards  her,  after 
which  she  received  the  thunder  of  his  destroying  en- 
gines. 

10  And  it  was  about  the  second  hour  after  the  mid- 
day, when  the  sound  of  the  battle-drum  was  heard. 

1 1  And,  as  they  approached  towards  each  other,  the 
people  shouted  aloud,  and  the  roaring  of  the  engines  was 
dreadful. 

12  And  the  servants  of  the  king  fought  bravely ;  and 
they  held  out  to  the  last. 

13  For  they  were  ashamed  to  let  the  nations  of  the 
earth  say  unto  them, 

14  Lo  !  ye,  who  are  the  lords  and  the  masters  of  the 
mighty  deep,  have  suffered  these  feeble  Yankees  to  con- 
quer you. 

15  Therefore,  the  slaughter  was  dreadful,  be3>-ond 
measure. 

16  And  the  black  clouds  of  smoke  arose,  and  ob- 
scured the  rays  of  the  sun,  so  that  they  fought  in  the 
shade. 

17  And  the  winds  moved  the  vessels  about,  and  they 
strove  to  avoid  the  balls  of  lead,  and  the  heavy  balls  of 
iron,  that  whistled  about  them  in  multitudes. 

1  o  (Now  these  balls,  which  were  gathered  from  the 
bowels  of  the  earth,  were  an  invention  unknown  to 
the  Philistines ;  even  Sampson  was  a  stranger  to 
them.) 

*  Com.  Bainlridge. 


54  LATE 

19  However,  the  ships  fought  hard,  for  the  space  of 
about  two  hours,  when  their  thunders  ceased. 

20  And  the  ship  of  Britain  had  become  a  wreck, 
and  the  deck  thereof  was  covered  with  blood  ! 

21  Nevertheless,  the  servants  of  the  king  struck  not 
the  flag  of  Britain ;  for  they  were  loth  and  hesitated  : 

22  But  when  Bainbridge,  who  saw  this,  came  down 
upon  them  a  second  time,  they  humbled  themselves, 
and  drew  down  the  British  cross. 

23  And  the  slain  and  the  wounded  of  the  king,  that 
day,  were  an  hundred  three  score  and  ten ; 

24  And  those  of  the  people  of  Columbia,  were  about 
thirty  and  four. 

25  Moreover,  Bainbridge,  the  captain  of  the  vessel 
of  the  United  States,  was  sorely  wounded. 

26  And  Lambert,  the  captain  of  the  ship  of  the 
king,  was  wounded,  even  unto  death. 

27  Now  when  the  servants  of  the  king  were  taken 
from  the  wreck,  and  meat  and  drink  sat  before  them, 
that  they  might  be  refreshed,  they  partook  thereof  and 
were  thankful. 

23  And  on  the  second  day  Bainbridge  put  a  match 
to  the  black  dust  that  remained  in  the  ship,  and  she 
burst  asunder,  and  rent  the  air  with  a  loud  noise. 

29  And  the  fragments  thereof  were  spread  upon  the 
waters  round  about. 

30  And  the  fish  of  the  sea,  even  the  mighty  whales, 
fled  from  the  noise  of  the  explosion. 

31  However,  the  Constitution  escaped  not  unhurt,  for 
she  was  much  wounded  in  her  tackling. 

32  So,  when  Bainbridge  came  into  the  haven  of  St. 
Salvador,   which  iieth  farther  to  the  south,  he  gave  the 


WAR.  5f> 

men  of  Britain,  whom  he  had   made  captive,  liberty  to 
go  home  to  the  king,  their  master. 

33  But  when  the  tidings  thereof  reaehed  the  palace 
of  the  king,  the  lords  and  the  princes  and  the  rulers  of 
Britain  were  confounded. 

34  Their  spirits  sunk  within  them :  astonishment 
seized  the  tyrants  of  the  ocean. 

35  The  smile  of  joy  i  pa  t-\l  from  their  counte- 
nances, and  the  uloom  of  despair  holered  around  them. 

36  The  wiss  men  and  the  orators  were  mute ;  they 
gaped  on-  upon  an       •     and  wist  not  what  to  say. 

37  But  the  people  of  Columbia,  from  the  north  to 
the  south,  were  gladdened ;  and  bestowed  great  honor 
and  praise  on  Bainbridge  the  captain. 

3«  Eten  the  great  Sanhedrim  of  the  people  rejoiced 
with  great  joy. 


5*  LATE 


CHAP.  XVI. 


Com.  Rodgers''  return  from  a  second  cruise — capture  of 
the  V.  States  brig  Viper — the  General  Armstrong 
and  a  Britishfrigate — privateering, 


OW  it  came  to  pass,  in  the  begianing  of  the  one 
thousand  eight  hundred  and  thirteenth  year  of  the 
Great  Founder  of  the  Christian  sect, 

2  That  a  strong  ship  of  the  United  States,  called 
the  President,  commanded  by  Rodgers,  returned  a  se- 
cond time  to  the  land  of  Columbia. 

3  And  while  she  was  upon  the  waters  of  the  great 
deep,  she  fell  in  with  one  of  the  packets  of  the  king 
called  after  the  swift  %ing  bird*  of  the  air,  and  made 
capture  thereof. 

4  And  in  the  ship  Rodgers  found  abundance  of  wealthy 
even  an  hundred,  sixty  and  eight  thousand  pieces  of 
silver. 

5  And  it  was  carried,  with  many  horses,  to  a  place 
©f  safe-keeping,t  in  the  town  of  Boston,  which  lieth  to 
the  east. 

6  Moreover,  he  made  capture  of  another  ship  of 
the  king,!  laden  with  oil  and  bones  of  the  great  fish  of 
the  deep. 

7  Now  it  happened,  on  the  seventeenth  day  of  the 
first  month  of  the  same  year, 

•  Swallow,     f  Bank  of  Boston.     \  Ship  Arga, 


WAR.  37 

i 

8  That  one  of  the  weak  vessels  of  the  United  States** 

Hecame  a  prey  to  one  of  the  strong  ships  of  the  kingy, 
called  the  Narcissus  :  albeit,  she  fought  not. 

9  About  this  time  the  great   waters  of  the   Chesa- 
peake, which  empty  into  the  sea,  were  guarded  by  the 
strong  chips  of  the  king,  so  that  the  vessels  might  not  ar-*  - 
rive  or  depart  therefrom. 

10  But  the  vessels  of  the  United  States,  and  the 
private  vessels  of  the  men  of  Columbia,  were  doing 
great  damage  unto  the  commerce  of  Britain,  even  in  her 
own  waters. 

1 1  And  the  number  of  the  private  vessels,  that  moved' 
swiftly  over  the  face  of  the  waters,  and  went  out  to  de- 
spoil the  commerce  of  Britain,  and  to  capture  the  mer- 
chant vessels  thereof,  was  about  two  hundred  two  score 
and  ten. 

12  And  they  made  capture  of  more  than  fifteen  hun- 
dred of  the  vessels  of  the  people  of  Britain. f 

13  Moreover j  there  was  a  sore  battle  between  one 
of  the  private  armed  vessels  of  the  people  of  the  United; 
States,  and  a  strong  ship  of  the  king.:}: 

14  The  privateer  was  called  the  General  Armstrong^ 
and  the  name  of  the  captain  was  Guy.  j j 

15  Now  G-iy  was  a  valiant  man,  and  fear  was  a 
stranger  to  him. . 

16  And  on  tire  eleventh  day  of  the  third  month  he- 
espied  from  afar  a  vessel  which  appeared  as  a  speck 
upon  the  waters. 

17"  But  when  he  bore  down  upon  her,  behold  !  sh» 


*  Viper,     f  Dui-ing  the  ivar.     \  A  British  frigate^ 

fj  Cant.    Champtam. 
F 


38  LATE ' 

was  a  fighting  ship  of  Britain,  carrying  the  destroying'' 
engines. 

1 8  And  Guy  was  near  being  entrapped,  for  he  was ' 
deceived,  thinking  it  was  a  merchant's  vessel. 

19  Therefore  he  was  compelled  to  fight ;  so  he  open- 
ed upon  the  vessel  of  the  king,  one  of  his  mischievou*  * 
engines  called,  in  the  vernacular  tongue,  Long-Tom. 

20  And  they  fought  hard,  and  the  noise  of  the  engines 
was  very  great. 

21  And  the  balls  of  lead  and  iron  showered  around 
Eke  hail-stones  \  lor  the  strong  ship  of  Britain  had  thenr 
in  abundance. 

22  Now  the  slaughter  was  dreadful  on  both  sides, 
and  Guy  was  on  the  point  of  making  capture  of  the 
ship  :  but  he  received  a  wound,  and  his  vessel  was  disa- 
ble d,  so  lie  made  good  his  escape. 

23  And  the  slain  and  the  wounded  of  Guy  were 
twenty  and  three,  and  the  vessel  of  the  king  lost  about 
twice  that  number. 

24  Now,  fortius  valiant  act,  Guy  gat  great  honor, 
and  (he  people  give  him  a  sword  of  fine  workmanship. 

25  Moreover,  the  Saratoga,  the  Scourge,  the  Chas- 
seur, and  many  other  private  vessels  of  the  people  of  the 
Uriied  Stutes,  were  a  grievous  plague  to  the  servants  of 
the  '.'(ig; 

26  Inasmuch  as  some  of  them  made  sport  with  the' 
Bji -lily  blockade  of  Britain,  which  she  put  forth  against 
the  free  people  of  the  land  of  Columbia. 

27  For  when  thej  came  nigh  unto  the  coast  of  Britain, 
they  made  ca  Ui  e  and  burnt  the  vessels  of  the  king,  that 
carried  rkl  ^merchandise,  costly  jewels,  and  silver  and  gold. 

"»jj  Yea,  even  in  their  own  waters,  and  in  the  sight  ©# 
tlwr  own  havens,  did  they  dfr  these  things. 


WAR.  $$ 

•29  For  it  "happened  that  the  cunning  Yankees  knew 
how  to  construct  the  swift-sailing  vessels,  that  they  out- 
ran the  strong  vessels  of  Britain. 

SO  And  as  the  ships  of  Britain  moved  but  slowly  o^h 
the  waters,  so  they  caught  them  not. 

31  Wherefore  the  artificers,  the  mechanics,  and  those 
who  dealt  in  merchandise,  raised  their  voices  to  the  great 
council  of  Britain,  saying, 

32  Lo  !  are  we  not  the  faithful  servants  of  the  king, 
our  master  ?  have  we  not  given  unto  him  the  one  half  of 
our  whole  substance  ?  and  shall  these  Yankees  take 
from  us  the  remainder  ? 

33  Hath  not  the  king  a  thousand  ships  of  war  ?  and 
wherefore  should  we  be  hemmed  in  ? 

34  Lo  !  our  merchant  vessels  are  idle!  neither ca» 
we  pass  in  safety  even  unto  the  land  of  Hibernia,  which 
lieth  nigh  unto  us. 

35  And,  behold,  the  captain  of  a  private  armed  ves- 
sel of  the  Yankees,  in  derision  of  the  proclamat  on  of 
our  lord  the  king,  hath  proclaimed  the  island  of  Great 
Britain  and  her  dependencies  in  a  state  of  rigouroius 
blockade ;  saying,  Lo  !   I  have  the  power  to  hem  ye  in, 

3<5  Therefore,  let  the  counsellors  of  the  king  ponder 
these  things,  and  let  the  strong  ships  of  Britain  drive  the 
vessels  of  Columbia  from  our  coast. 

37  "Now  the  wisemen  of  Britain  heard  those  things  with 
sorrow ;  and  they  spake  one  to  another  concerning  the 
matter : 

38  But  they  wist  not  what  to  do  ;  for  the  cunning  of 
gl  e  •  aptains  of  the  fast  sailing  vessels  of  Columbia,  sur? 
passed  the  wisdom  of  the  lords  of  Britain. 


$0  LATE 

CHAP.  XVH. 

'Capture  and  hunting  of  Ogdensburgh  by  the  BritisTt. 


XN  these  days  the  war  against  Columbia  was  waged 
-with  great  violence, 

2  And  the  fur-clad  savages  prowled  in  secret  places 
and  fell  upon  the  helpless. 

2  '  They  hid  themselves  in  the  wilderness ;  they 
couched  down  as  a  lion;  and,  as  a  young  lion,  they 
watched  for  their  prey.' 

4  The  tall  and  leafless  trees  of  the  forest  bent  to  the 
-Strong  winds  of  the  north  ;  and  the  sound  thereof  was 
-%as  the  roaring  of  mighty  waters. 

5  Moreover,  the  face  of  the  earth  was  covered  with 
s&nov     and  the  water  of  the  rivers  was  frowst. 

6  And  the  borders  of  Columbia,  nigh  unto  the  pro- 
"  vince  of  the  king,  were  ex.  osed  to  the  transgressions  of 
~the  enemy. 

7  And  the  soldiers  of  the  king  came  in  abundance 
from  the  island  of  Britain,  and  pitched  their  tents  in  the 
Canadian  provinces. 

8  Accordingly,  it  came  to  pass,  on  the  twenty-second 
day  of  the  second  month,  being  the  birth-day  of  Wash- 
ington, the  deliverer, 

9  That  a  mighty  host  came  out  of  the  province  of 
the  king,  and  went  against*  the  town  of  Ogdensburgh, 

•  sand  made  capture  thereof. 


WAR.  61 

.10  And  there  were  five  slain  and  ten  wounded  of 
the  people  of  Columbia,  and  about  three  score  were 
taken  by  the  servants  of  the  king. 

11  Moreover,  the  men  of  Britain  gat  much  spoil; 
§ven  a  large  quantity  of  the  black  dust  fell  into  their 
hands  ; 

12  And  twelve  of  the  destroying  engines,  which  the 
people  of  Columbia  had  taken  from  the  king  about  forty 
years  before. 

13  Also,  three  hundred  tents,  and  more  than  a  thou- 
sand, weapons  of  war;  but  the  vessels  and  the  boats 
they  consumed  with  fire. 

14  Now  Ogdensburgh  was  a  beautiful  village  to  be- 
hold ;  nevertheless  they  burned  it  with  fire,  and  it  be- 
came a  heap  of  ruins. 

15  And  the  women  and  the  children  looked  for  their 
homes,  but  found  them  not ;  and  they  sat  down  in  sor- 
row, for  the  haughty  conquerors  laughed  at  their  suffer- 
ings. 

16  After  which  they  returned  with  their  spoil  to 
Prescott,  from  whence  the}"  came,  being  on  the  other 
side  of  the  water,  in  the  province  of  the  king. 

17  And  t!;e  honor  that  was  given  to  the  servants  of 
Britain  that  day  was  as  a  thimble  full  of  water  spilt  into 
tiie  sea  :  for  they  were  like  unto  a  giant  going  cut  against 
a  bulrush. 


S2  LATE 


6HAP.  XVIII. 


Uttpturt  of  the  Peacock,  of  18  guns,  by  the  V.  S> 
sloop  of  war  Hornet,  of  £6  gitis — return  of  the 
Chesapeake  from  a  cruise. 


T 


HE  deeds  of  the  renowned  warriors,  the  patriots, 
and  the  valiant  men  of  Columbia,  have  prepared  a  path 
for  the  scribe,  which  he  is  compelled  to  follow  : 

2  But,  as  the  soaring  eagle  moves  to  its  craggy  nest, 
or  the  cooing  dove  to  its  tender  mate,  so  is  the  compulsion 
of  his  heart. 

3  If  the  wickedness  of  Britain  hath  made  manifest 
her  folly :  if  her  sons  have  sat  down  in  sackcloth  and 
ashes,  the  scribe  looketh  down  upon  her  with  pity. 

4  It  is  written  that,  He  who  prideth  himself  in  his 
strength  shall  be  humbled  j  and  the  haughty  shall  be 
brought  low. 

5  And,  if  the  Lord  hath  smiled  upofc  the  arms  of 
Columbia,  let  no  man  frown. 

6  Now  it  came  to  pass,  in  the  eighteen  hundred  and 
thirteenth  year  of  the  christian  era,  on  the  twenty-fourth 
day  of  the  second  month, 

7  That  one  of  the  righting  vessels  of  Columbia,  called 
the  Hornet,  which  signifieth,  in  the  vernacular  tongue^ 
a  fly  whose  sting  is  poison, 

8  Moved  upon  the  waters  of  the  great   deep,  far  to 
«»he  south,  aear  4mto  a  place  whkh  is  called  Denaaxara. 


WAR.        -  68 

9  Moreover,  the  captain  of  the  Hornet  "Tas  a  valiant 
man.  and  lus  same  was  Lawrence. 

10  Aad  it  was  towards  the  setting  of  the  sun,  whe* 
-he  came  njgfej  unto  one  of  tte   strong  ships  of  the  kitg^ 

called  the  Peacock,  alter,  the  bird-  whose  feathers  .are 
beautiful  to  beheld ; 

11  And  the  captain  thereof  was  sir-named  Peake. 

12  Now  began  the  roaring  noises  of  the  engines  of 
destruction,  that  opened  their  mouths  against  one  an- 
other; and  dreadful  was  the  slaughter  of  that  day. 

13  Nevertheless,  iu  the  space  of  about  the  fourth 
part  of  an  hour,  the  vessel  ©f  the  king  was  captured  by 

•  the  people  of  Columbia. 

14  And.  they  found  therein  some  of  the  mariners  of 
the  United  States,  who  had  begged  that  they  might  go 
down  into  the  hold  of  the  ship,  a&d  not  raise  their  hands 
against  the  blood  of  their  own  brethren  : 

15  But  Peake,  the  commander,  suffered  them  not,  but 
compelled  them  to  fight  against  their  own  kinsmen  :  and 
one  of  them  was  slain  in  battle. 

16  And  the  killed  and  maimed  of  the  people  of  Bri^ 
tain,  were  about  two  score  and  two :  and  Peake  the  cap- 

*taifl,  was  also  slain  :  and  the  loss  of  Columbia  was  about 
five  souls ! 

17  Moreover,  the  Peacock  sunk  down  into  the  yawn- 
ing deep,  before  they  could  get  all  the  men  of  Britain  out 
of  her ;  and  three  of  the  people  of  Columbia  were  bu- 
ried with  her,  whilst  in  the  humane  act  of  endeavouring 
to  preserve  the  lives  of  the  enemy, 

18  Now  this  was  the  fifth  fighting  vessel  of  the  king 
.  which  had  been  hu»ibled,  since  the  decree  of  the  great 
v  Sanhedrim,  before  the  destroyiug  engines  of  the  people 

of  Columbia. 


&l  LATE 

19  And  Lawrence,  and  the  brave  men  that  fought 
with  him,  had  honor  and  praise  poured  out  upon  them 
abundantly. 

20  Moreover,  the  people  of  New- York  gave  unt*> 
Lawrence  vessels  of  silver,  with  curious  devices  ;  and 
they  made  a  feast  for  the  men  who  fought  in  the  Hor- 
net. 

21  And  air  the  people  were  exceedingly  rejoiced  at 
the,,  valiant  acts  of  Lawrence,  and  his  fame  extended 
throughout  the  land  of  Columbia ;  the  sound  of  his 
name  was  the  joy  of  every  heart. 

5  2  But  when  the  news  thereof  reached  the  ears  of 
the  wise  men  of  Britain,  they  said,  Lo  !  these  men  are 
giants;  neither  are  they  like  unto  the    warriors  of  the 

23  And  their  witchcraft  and  their  cunning  are  dark- 
ness unto  us;  even  as  when  a, man  putteth  a  candle  un- 
der a  bushel. 

24  Behold !  five  times  hath  the  l  striped  bunting' 
of  Columbia,  triumphed,  over  the  royal  cross  of  Bri- 
tain, 

2£  ■  Now  the  great  Sanhedrim,  who  were  assembled 
together,  forgat  not  the  valiant  deeds  of  the  mariners  of 
Columbia. 

2G  For  they  divided  amongst  them  more  than  seven- 
ty thousand  pieces  o{  silver. 

2"  And  il  came  to  pass,  on  the  tenth  day  of  the 
fo:;rth  month,  in  the  same  year,  that  the  Chesapeake,  a 
strong  vessel  of  the  United  States,  arrived  in  the  haven 
of  Bo  ton. 

28  She  had.  sailed  upon  the  face  df  the  rough  wa- 


WAIL  <-« 

ters  ra»re  than  an  hundred  days,  after  she  departed  from 
the  land  of  Columbia,  and  passed  a  great  way  to  tha 
south  : 

29  And  went  hard  by  the  island  of  Barbadoes,  and 
those  places,  in  the  great  sea  which  encompasseth  the 
world,  from  whence  they  bring  poisoned  waters,  which 
open  the  womb  of  the  earth  to  receive  the  unwary  song 
of  men. 

30  Moreover,  in  returning,  she  came  nigh  unto  the 
Capes  of  Virginia,  where  the  sweet-scented  plant* 
greweth  in  abundance. 

31  And  while  she  was  on  the>ecean  she  captured  m 
.cumber  of  the  vessels  of  the  people  of  Britain,  whicjn 
were  laden  with  rich  merchandise. 


TeteccQ, 


€6  LATE 


CHAP.  XIX. 


'Capture,  of  little  York,  in  Upper  Canada — the  destn^ 
,  tion  of  the  whole  American  army  prevented  by  the 
precaution  of  Gen.  Pike — his  death. 


N 


OW,  whilst  these  things  happened  in  the  south, 
and  the  evils  of  war  destroyed  the  life  of  man,  and  the 
smiles  of  heaven  strengthened  the  arms,  and  lifted  up 
the  glory  of  Columbia. ; 

2  Behold,  preparations  of  warfare  were  making  on 
the  borders  of  the  great  lakes  of  the  north. 

3  And  the  vessels  of  war  of  Columbia  that  were  tip- 
on  the  waters  of  the  lake  called  Ontario,  were  com- 
manded by  a  brave  man,  whose  name  was  Chauncey. 

4  Now  on  the  twenty  fifth  day  of  the  fourth  month, 
the  army  of  Columbia,  who  were  gathered  on  the  shore 
of  the  lake,  went  down  into  the  strong  vessels  of  Chaua- 
eey. 

5  And  the  number  that  went  into  the  vessels  was 
about  two  thousand. 

6  And  Henry*  and  Zebulon,  whose  sir-name  was 
Pike,f  were  the  chief  captains  ol  the  host  of  Columbia. 

7  On  the  same  day  the  sails  of  the  vessels  were 
sprend  to  the  winds  of  heaven,  and  they  moved  towards 

*  Major  General  Dearborn,     t  Brig.  G'en<  Pike- 


WAR  e?- 

*  place  called  Little  York,*  in  the  province  of  Canada. 

8  Howbeit,  the  winds  were  adverse  and  blew  with- 
great  violence  from  the  east. 

9  Nevertheless,  on  the  morning  of  the  twenty-seventh 
day  of  the  same  mouth,  the  army  of  Columbia,  com- 
manded by  Pike,  the  chief  captain,  moved  out  of  the 
strong  ships  of  the    United   States. 

10  But  He  ry  remained  on  board  the  vessel  of' 
Chauncey,  neither  came  he  to  the    water's  edge. 

1 1  And  the  place  where  the  host  of  Columbia  land- 
ed was  to  the  west  of  the  town,  about  twenty  and  four, 
furlongs,  and  from  the  strong  hold  of  the  king  about  tea' 
furlongs. 

12  She  gallant  Forsyth,  who  led  a  bai.d  of  brave 
men,  who  fought  not  for  filthy  lucre's  sake,  went  before- 
the  host. 

13  And  their  weapons  of  war  were  of  curious  work- 
manship, and  they  sent  forth  balls  it  lead  ;  such  as 
w:r<  unknown  to  Pharoah  when  he  followed  the  Chil- 
dren of  Israel  down  into  the  red  sea 

14  Now  Zebulon,  with  a  thousand  chosen  men,  fol- 
lowed close  after  Forsyth,  the-  warrior. 

15  Abouj  this  time  the  savages  and  the  servants  of 
the  king,  even  a  great  multitude,  opened  their  engines  of 
destruction  without  mercy. 

]  6  And  from  the  forest,  and  the  secret  places,  their 
balls  were  showered  like  unto  hail-stones,  and  the  sound' 
thereof  was  as  sharp  thunder. 

1"  .-.nil  a  man,   whose  name  was  Sheaffe,   was  the 

chief  captain  of  the  host  of  Britain. 

> _ ■  —        ■/ 

*  Capital  of  U.  Canada.  t  Rifles, 


<3r  EATE 

1 8  Now  the  destroying  engines  of  the  strotog  hold 
@f  the  king  issued  fire  and  smoke  with  a  mighty  noise 
and  shot  at  the  vessels  of  the  United  States. 

19  Bmt  Chauncey  returned  unto  them  four-fold  ;  and 
and  the  battle  waxed  hot,  both  on  the  land  and  on  the 
water. 

20  And  the  men  of  Columbia  rushed  forward  with 
terseness,  and  drove  the  men  of  Britain  from  their  strong 
hold.       • 

21  So  they  fled  towards  the  town  for  safety,  for  they 
;were  overcome ;  and  the  savages  were  smitten  with 
fear,  their  loud  yellings  ceased,  and  their  feet  were  light, 
as  the  wild  roe ; 

22  Nevertheless,  the  men  of  Columbia  shouted  aloud, 
and  sounded  their  trumpets,  their  cymbals,  and  their 
noisy  drums,  which  were  contrived  since  the  days  of 
Jeroboam,  king  of  Israel. 

23  And  Zebulon,  the  valiant  warrior,  followed  hard 
after  them ;  and  they  found  no  rest ;  for  they  were  sore 
pushed,  and  the  phaatora  of  their  imaginations  pictured 
©at  new  evils. 

24  So  when  they  found  they  were  nigh  being  made 
captive,  they  departed  in  haste  from  the  town  and  from 
the  strong  hold  thereof,  save  about  two  score! 

25  Now  when  the  army  of  Britain  was  overthrown ; 
when  they  were  compelled  to  flee  from  the  streng  held  p 
the  wickedness  of  Satan  entered  into  their  hearts. 

26  And  they  gathered  together  abundance  of  the 
black  dust  and  fixed  it  in  the  lowermost  part  of  the  fort, 
below  the  walls  of  stone. 

2f  After  which  they  put  a  lighted  match  nigh  to  it4 


WAR.  6$ 

so  that  when  the  whole  army  of  Columbia  got  into  the 
hold,  they  might  be  destroyed. 

28  But  the  Lord,  who  is  good,  even  he  who  govern^ 
eth  the  destinies  of  man,  permitted  it  not. 

29  Now  when  Zebulon  and  his  army  came  out  of 
the  thick  woods,  in  battle  array,  to  go  forth  against  the 
strong  hold, 

30  Lo  !  they  saw  not  the  host  of  Britain ;  but  the 
eye  of  Zebulon  was  as  the  eye  of  an  eagle,  his  strength 
as  the  lion,  and  his  judgment  as  the  wise  : 

31  So  he  stayed  his  men  of  war  from  rushing  for- 
ward towards  the  place,  lest  they  might  be  entrapped  : 
and  he  caused  them  to  move  along  the  wood  to  the 
right  hand  and  to  the  left. 

32  About  this  time,  a  stripling  from  the  south,  with 
his  weapon  of  war  in  his  hand,  ran  up  to  Zebulon,  and 
spake  unto  him,  saying, 

S3  Behold  !  a  man  of  Britain  appeared)  in  the  fort; 
suffer  me,  I  pray  thee,  to  slay  him,  for  he  is  busied  with 
the  destroying  engines : 

34  But  Zebulon  said,  nay ;  we  are  yet  a  great  wa# 
off. 

35  And  the  3*oung  man  entreated  him  a  second  time, 
saying,  i  beseech  thee,  let  me  step  out  before  the  host 
and  slay  him,  lest  the  engine  be  let  loose  upon  us  ;  thea 
Zebulo'i  said  unto  him,   Go. 

36  So  he  ran  out  before  the  army  and  shot  the  maa, 
and  he  fell  to  the  earth ;  and  it  was  about  a  furJone  off, 
and  the  weight  of  the  ball  was  about  the  weight  ol  a 
shekel. 

37  But  as  the  young  man  returned  to  where  tfte  ar- 
ray stayed,  behold  !    the  black  dust  in  the  hold  caught 

G 


fO-  LATE 

fire,  and  it  rent  the  air  with  the  noise  of  a  thousand' 
thunders  : 

38  And  the  whole  army  fell  down  upon  their  faces* 
to  the  earth  ;  and  the  stones,  and  the  fragments  of  rocks, 
were  lifted  high ;  and  the  falling  thereof  was  terrible 
even  unto  deaths 

39  Yea,  it  was  dreadful  as  the  mighty  earthquake, 
which  ovefturneth  cities. 

40  vVnd  the  whole  face  of  the  earth  round  about,  and 
the  army  of  2,ebulon,  were  overshadowed  with  black 
smoke  ;  so  that,   for  a  time,  one  man  saw  not  another  : 

41  But  when  tsie  heavy  clouds  of  smoke  passed  avray 
towards  the  west,  behold  the  ea*ti  was  covered  with  the 
killed  and  the  wounded. 

42  las:  the  sight  was  shocking  to  behold ;  as  the 
deed  was  ignoble,, 

43  About  two  hundred'  men  rose  not  :  the  stones  had; 
bruised  them  ;  the  sharp  rocks  had  fallen   upon  them :. 

44  They  were  wedged  into  the  earth  :  their  weapons* 
of  war  were  bent  down  into  the  ground  with  them  ; 
their  feet  wereturnei  towards  heaven;  their  limbs  were 
lopped  off. 

45  but  when  those  who  escaped  unhurt  arose  and 
looked  .iiouiv',  they  beheld  not  their  chieftain;  he  had 
fanen  to  the  earth. 

40  A  huge  st<,ne  smote  him  upon  the  back,  and 
tvro  ot  tiis  officers,    ^or.e    of    whom    was  the  gallant 


*  IJotsever  strange  this  may  appear,  it  is  a  fact  that 
the.  conevssion  of  the  air  produced  that  ejfett  on  near Uj 
om  wuo  fronted  the  explosion. 


war.  m. 

Fraser,)  raised  hira  up  and  led  him  forth  from  the  field 
of  murder ;  the  one  on  the  one  side,  and  the  other  on 
•the  other  side. 

47  And  as  they  led  him  away  he  turned  his  head 
around  to  his  brave  warriors,  and  said  unto  them,  Go 
on  ;  1  will  be  with  you  soon  !  I  am  not  slain. 

43  The  magic  of  his  words  gave  joy  to  their  hearts; 
for  they  loved  him  as  they  loved  their  own  father. 

49  And  with  resistless  force  his  noble  band  rushed  on, 
at  the  trumpet's  sound,  over  the  heaps  of  slain  and 
wounded,  to  glory,  and  to  -triumph  ! 

50  And  a  swift  messenger  ran  down  unto  Henry, 
with  these  words  in  his  mouth,  Lo  !  the  right  hand  of 
eur  army  is  slain  !  its  pride  is  gone  !  Zebulon  has  fal- 
len ? 

51  Immediately  Henry  departed  fron*  the  fleet,  and 
came  to  the  shore,  and  went  up  and  led  the  host  of  Co- 
lumbia to  the  town  and  took  it. 

52  Now  the  slain,  the  maimed  and  the  captives  of 
the  host  of  Britain  that  day,  were  about  a  thousand 
■fighting  men  : 

53  And  the  loss  of  the  men  of  Columbia  was  about 
three  hundred  slain  and  wounded. 

54  And  Henry,  the  chief  captain,  gave  great  honor  to 
■the  captains  unxler  him,  ever,  Riplev,  Forsyth  and  Eus- 
tis,  and  all  the  brave  men  that  fought  that  day. 

55  Nevertheless,  SheafFe,  the  captain  of  the  king, 
escaped  with  a  handful  of  men,  and  the  swift-footed 
savages  :  leaving  behind  him  the  insignia  of  British 
mercy  ! — a  human  scalp  ! 


-72  LATE 

56  But  the  rejoicings  of  the  people  were  mingled 
with  deep  sorrow ;  for  the  brave  were  slain  in  battle. 

57  Oh  !  earth,  how  long  shall  thy  inhabitants  delight 
in  warfare  ?  when  shall  the  old  men  cease  to  weep  for 
their  children  ? 

58  Behold  yon  lonely  widows  ;  they  weep  for  their 
husbands  and  their  children ;  but  they  shall  see  their 
faces  no  more  ! 

59  The, fair  daughters  of  Columbia  sigh  for  the  re- 
turn of  their  beloved. 

60  Seest  thou  those  little  ones  ?  they  fly  to  their  dis- 
consolate mother,  they  leap  with  joy  at  the  name  of 
father  !  but  he  shall  never  return  ! 

61  Oh !  that  they  had  cast  the  black  dust  into  the 
sea!  t'  en  might  not  the  children  of  men  weep  and 
wail. 

62  Now  on  the  next  day,  when  the  army  of  Zebulon 
gat  the  tidings  that  their  captain  was  slain,  the  tears 
started  in  their  eyes;  the}'  were  mute,  their  hearts  failed 
them  ;  and  they  became  as  weak  women. 

63  Moreover,  the  United  States  made  great  lamen- 
tations over  him ;  and  the  remembrance  of  his  name 
shall  live  in  the  hearts  of  the  people. 

64  The  eagle  of  Columbia  dropt  a  feather  from  her 
wing,  which  the  angel  of  L*  ightness  caught  ere  it  fell  to 
the  earth,  ascended  to  heaven,  and  recorded  the  name 
©f  Pike. 


WAR';  rs 


CHAP.  XX. 

Sketches  of  the  History  of  America. 


JL  HE  the  voice  of  many  years  shall  drop  upon  the 
children  of  men  ;  and  our  children's  children  shall  hear- 
l ten  unto  it  in  the  days  to  come. 

2  The  country  of  Columbia  is  a  wide  extended  land, 
which  reacheth  from  the  north  to  the  south,  more  thau 
eight  thousand  miles  ;  and  the  breadth  thereof  is  about 
three  thousand. 

S  Moreover  the  name  of  the  country  was  called  aftei 
the  name  of  a  great  man,  who  was  born  in  a  place  called 
•Genoa  ;  being  in  Italia,  en  the  sea-coast. 

4  Kis  name  was  Christopher,  sir-named  Columbus 

5  As  the  righteous  man  struggleth  against  wickedness, 
so  did  he  against  ignorance    and  stupidity. 

6  Nevertheless,  it  came  to  pass,  hi  the  fourteen  hun- 
dred and  ninety  second  year  of  the  Christian  era,  that  he 
crossed  the  waters  of  the  mighty  deep,  a  thing  that  had 
never  been  known  among  the  sons  of  men. 

7  And  the  place  where  he  landed  was  an  island  in 
the  sea,  nigh  unto  the  continent  of  Columbia,  called  San 
Salvador  ;  which,  being  interpreted,  signifieth  a  place  of 
safety. 

8  And  the  place  was  inhabited  by  wild  savages,  and 
they  were  naked. 

9  Now  when  the  people  heard  that  Columbus  had 
found  a  new  land,  they  were  astonished  beyond  measure,, 

r-     ° 


74  LATE 

for  it  was  many  thousand  miles  off;  moreover,  some  of 
them  strove  to  rob  him  of  the  honour,  and  he  was  treated 
wrongfully. 

10  But  his  name  was  lifted  up  above  his  enemies,  and 
it  shall  not  be  lost. 

1 1  Now  the  land  of  Columbia  is  a  most  plentiful  land, 
yielding  tgold  and  silver,  and  brass  and  iron  abundantly. 

12  Likewise,  all  manner  of  creatures  which  are  used 
for  food,  and  herbs  and  fruits  of  the  earth  : 

13  From  the  red  cherry,  and  the  rosy  peach  of  the 
north,  to  the  lemon,  and  the  golden  orange  of  the  south. 

14  And  from  the  small  insect,  that  cheateth  the  mi- 
croscopic eye,  to  the  huge  mammoth  that  once  moved  on 
the  borders  of  the  river  Hudson ;  on  the  great  river 
Ohio ;  and  even  down  to  the  country  of  Patagonia  in 
the  south. 

15  Now  the  herghth  of  a  mammoth  is  about  seven 
cubits  and  a  half,  and  the  length"  thereof  fourteen  cu- 
bits ;  and  the  bones  thereof  being  weighed  are  more  than 
thirty  thousand  shekels  ;  and  the  length  of  the  tusks  is 
more  than  six  cubits. 

16  It  is  more  wonderful  than  the  elephant ;  and  the 
history  thereof,  is  it  not  recorded  in  the  book  of  Jeffer- 
son, the  scribe  ?'* 

17  The  fierce  tyger  and  the  spotted  leopard  dwell 
in  the  dark  forests ;  and  the  swift -footed  deer  upon 
the  mountains  and  high  places. 

18' ^ow  the  number  of  inhabitants  that  are  spread 
over  the  whole  continent,  is  more  than  an  hundred  mil- 
lion. 


*  Jefferson's  notes  on   Virginia, 


war.  75 

.19  And  the  people  of  Columbia,  who  are  indepen- 
dent of 'he  tyrants  of  the  earth,  and  who  dwell  between 
the  great  river  which  is  called  Mississippi,  in  the  south, 
and  the  province  of  Canada  in  the  north,  being  number- 
ed, are  about  ten  thousand  times  ten  thousand  souls.* 

20  The  men  are  comely  and  noble,  and  cowardice 
hath  forgot  to  light  upon  them  :  neither  are  they  a  su- 
perstitious people;. they  are  peace-makers,  they  love 
the  God  of  Israel,  and  worship  him ;  and  there  are  no 
idolaters  amongst  them. 

2  i  The  women  are  passing  beautiful ;  they  are  like 
unto  fresh  lilies  ;  their  cheeks  are  like  wild  roses  ;  their 
lip3  as  a  thread  of  scarlet;  nature  hath  gifted  them  with 
Roman  virtue  and  patriotism  ;  and  they  have  spread 
goodness  with  a  plentiful  hand. 

22  Now  it  had  happened  in  times  pa?t  that  the  king 
of  .Britain  had  made  war  upon  the  people  of  Columbia, 
even  forty  years  ago. 

23  For  the  riches  and  prosperity  of  Columbia  had 
become  great,  and  the  king  coveted  them. 

24  And  the  war  raged  with  the  might  of  Britain, 
even  in  the  heart  of  the  land  of  Columbia,  for  about  the 
space  of  seven  years,  when  the  army  of  Columbia  be- 
came triumphant ;  neither  could  the  power  of  Britain 
conquer  the  sons  of  liberty. 

25  Accordingly  a  part  of  those  who  remained  of 
the  armies  of  Britain  returned  home  to  the  king,  their 
master ;  but  a  great  number  refused  to  return,   preler- 

*  T  last  census,  in  1810,  stated  the  amount  at 
about  8,  '00,000,  the  number  may  now  probably  _be  in* 
creased  to  10,000,000. 


T6  LATE 

-ing  a  country  whose  mild  laws  are  equally  and  righteous- 
ly dispensed,  and  where  the  hard  earnings  of  industry 
are  not  taken  away  by  the  tax-gatherer  : 

26  So  there  was  peace  throughout  the  United  States, 
and  a  covenant  made  between  the  nations. 

27  But  the  names  of  the  wise  men  of  the  great  San- 
hedrim in v  those  days,  and  the  names  of  those  who 
fought  hard  in  battle,  and  spilt  their  blood  in  the  cause 
of  liberty,  are  they  not  written  ia  tne  books  of  the  chron- 
icles ot  those  days  ? 

28  Now  the  fatness  of  the  land  of  Columbia  bringeth 
people  from  all  nations  to  dwell  therein. 

29  The  people  of  Columbia  use  no  persuasion,  the 
pacred  cause  of  Liberty  is  the  star  oe  attrac- 
tion ;  and  the  time  shall  come  when  the  eyes  of  all  men 
:sha!l  be  opened,  and  the  earth  shall  rejoice. 

SO  Their  laws  are  wholesome,  for  the  people  are  the 
lawgivers,  even  as  it  was  in  the  days  of  Cesar ;  but  they 
v&jqqw  no  kioes. 


VVAIl.  77 


chap.  xxi. 


f)epredatioKs  hi  tl>e  Chesapeake — Hayre-de-Grace 
burnt  by  the  British  under  Adm.  Ccckbirn — at- 
tack on  Cranp  Island — Hampton  taken  by  the 
British — outrages . 


OW  it  came  to  pass,  that  the  mighty  fleet  of  Bri- 
tain, which  whs  moving  round  about  the  great  Bay  of 
Chesapeake,  committed  much  .evil  upon  the  shores 
thereof. 

2  And  they  robbed  those  who  were  defenceless,  and 
carried  away  their  fatted  cattle,  their  sheep,  and  aii 
those  things  which  they  found,  and  put  them  into  the 
strong  ships  of  the  king. 

3  Moreover,  they  burnt  the  dwellings  of  the  helpless 
with  fire,  and  they  accounted  it  sport. 

4  Aad  the  old  men,  the  little  children,  and  the  women, 
yea,  the  fair  daughters  of  Columbia,  were  compelled  te 
fly  from  the  wickedness  of  barbarians. 

5  Even  the  small  villages  that  rose  beautifully  on  the 
river  side,  became  a  prey  unto  them,  and  were  consumed 
by  men  who  called  themselves  the  mighty  conquerors  of 
Europe. 

6  They  werp  like  hungry  wolves  that  are  never  satis.- 
ued;  destruction  and  de/astation  marked  their  footsteps 

Y  Now  the  ships  of  the  king  were  commanded  by  3 
.'  man  whose  name  was  Cockbnrji, 


33  -LXTi; 

"8  And  it  was  so,  that  on  the  third  day  of  the  'fifth 
araonth,  in  the  thirty  and  seventh  year  of  the  indepen- 
dence of  the  people  of  Columbia, 

9  Cockburn,  sir-named  the  wicked,  led  forth  a  host 
-of  the  savage  men  of  Britain,  against  a  pleasant  village, 
called  IIavre-do~Grace,  which  lieth  on  the  borders  of 
.the  Susquehanna,  a  noble  river ;  being  in  the  state  of 
Maryland. 

10  Now  there  was  none  !o  defend  the  place,  save  one 
man,  whose  s'r-nanie  was  O'Neil,  who  came  from  the 
land  of  Hibernia,  and  him  they  made  captive. 

1 1  And  they  came  as  the  barbarians  of  the  wilder- 
ness: fierceness  was  in  their  looks,  cruelty  was  in  their 
hearts. 

12  To  the  dwelling  houses  they  put  the  burning 
brand,  and  plundered  the  poor  and  needy  without  pity^ 
such  wickedness  was  not  done  even  among  the  Philis- 
tines. 

13  The  women  and  children  cried  aloud,  and  fell 
down  at  the  feet  of  the  chief  captain  of  the  king:  but, 
alas  !  his  heart  was  like  unto  the  heart  of  Pharaoh  ;  he 
heard  them  not. 

14  However,  it  came  to  pass,  the  next  day,  when 
the  pitiless  Cockburn  had  collected  his  booty,  and 
glutted  his  savage  disposition,  he  departed. 

15  And  on  the  sixth  day  of  the  same  month  he 
went  against  other  unprotected  villages,  which  lie  ojl 
the  river  Sassafras,  called  Frederickstown  and  George- 
town, and  burnt  them  idso. 

16  So  did  he   return  to  his  wickedness  as  a  dog  re- 
!  turneth  to  his  v  mit. 

,17  Now  about  this  time  the  number  of  the  strong 


WAR.  79 

strips  of  TJritain  was  increased,  and  great  multitudes  of 
the  soldiers  of  the  king  came  with  them  to  the  waters 
of  the  Chesapeake. 

18  And  it  came  to  pass,  on  the  twenty-second  day 
of  the  next  month,  that  C'cckburn,  the  chief  captain  of 
the  ships  of  Britain,  essayed  to  go  against  a  small  island, 
nigh  unto  Norfolk  in  the  state  of  Virginia,  called  in  the 
rernacular  tongue,  Crany-Island. 

19  And  the  number  of  the  men  of  Britain  that  went 
against  the  island  was  about  five  thousand ;  and  they 
began  to   get  upon  the  shore  at  the  dawning  of  the  day. 

20  Near  unto  this  place  a  few  vessels  of  Columbia, 
commanded  fry  the  gallant  Casein,  were  hemmed  in  by 
afrtut  a  score  of  the  mighty  ahips  of  the  king. 

21  Now  the  fighting  vessels  under  Cassin  were 
mostly  small,  and  were  called  gain  boats,  and  they  were 
little  more  than  half  a  score  in  number. 

22  Howbeit,  but  a  few  days  before,  they  went  against 
the  Junon,*  a  strong  ship  of  Britain,"  and  compelled  her 
to  depart  from  before  the  mouths  of  the  destroying  en- 
gines. 

23  But  this  island  was  defenceless  ;  and  there  came 
to  protect  it  an  hundred  brave  seamen  from  the  gun- 
boats, and  an  hundred  and  fifty  valiant  men  from  the 
Constellation,  a  lighting  ship  of  the  United   States. 

24  And  they  brought  the  destroying  engines  with 
them,  and  they  let  them  loose  upon  the  vessels  of  the 
king,  and   upon   the  men  who   were  landing  upon  th© 


*  British  Frigate,  J  anon, 


80  LATE 

25  And  the  thundering  noise  thereof  astonished 
the  servants  of  the  king:  for  they  knew  there  was  but 
a  handful  of  men  upon  the  island. 

26  Moreover,  Britain  in  her  folly  had  introduced  a 
new  instrument  of  destruction,  called  Congreve  Rock- 
ets, in  honour  of  their  inventor;  and  these  were  used 
in  great  abundance. 

T{  But  they  were  harmless  as  turtle  doves,  for  they 
killed  not  a  man. 

23  Now  the  men  of  Columbia,  with  their  handicraft, 
shot  the  balls  of  iron  strait  as  an  arrow  from  a  bow,  and 
j&ereby  did  much  damage  to  the  servants  of  the  king. 

29  Inasmuch  as  the}'  slew  about  two  hundred  of  the 
men  of  Britain  that  day;  and  drove  the  host  of  thena 
from  the  island. 

30  So  the  might}7  army  of  Britain  fled  in  haste  to  the 
strong  ships  of  the  king  for  safety. 

31  Now  on  the  twenty-fifth  day  of  the  same  month 
the  army  of  Britain  went  against  a  village  called  t  lamp* 
ton,  which  lieth  in  the  state  of  Virginia,  and  touk  it. 

32  Howbeit,  the  little  band  of  Columbia,  command- 
ed by  Cr'utchflelJ,  fought  hard  against  them. 

33  Nevertheless,  they  prevailed  over  him,  and  sl.'w 
seven  of  his  men,  aud  wounded  others,  upon  which  he 
fled  ;  for  the  men  of  Britain  were  like  unto  a  swarm  of 
locusts. 

34  But  the  blood  of  two  hundred  royal  invaders  be- 
came a  sacrifice  to  the  wickedness  of  their  leaders. 

35, Oh  !  England  !  that  a  veil  might  be  cast  over  flhy 
transgressions  of  that  day  :  but  it  cannot  be. 

36  Thy  wickedness  shall  be  written  with  a  ppn  '■'. 
iron,  aud  with  the  point  of  a  diamond. 


WAR.  8* 

37  It  was  here,  even  in  Hampton,  that  thy  strength 
and  thy  majesty  rose  up  against  the  poor,  the  sick,  aufi 
the  needy. 

3S  Instead  of  protecting  the  tender  women,  the  fair- 
est  work  of  God,  the  life  of  the  world  ;  behold  !  what 
hast  thou  done  ? 

39  See  !  the  shrieking  matron  cast  herself  into  the 
waters  that  she  may  escape  thy  brutal  violence  :  but  all 
in  vain  j  her  garments  are  torn  from  her ;  she  becomes 
a  prey  to  thy  savage  lust. 

40  Not  she  alone,  but  her  daughter,  and  her  fair  sis- 
ters, have  fallen  into  thy  unhallowed  hands,  and  been  de- 
filed ! 

41  Oh,  Britain  !  the  voice  of  violated  chastity  riseth 
up  against  thee ;  the  mark  of  the  beast  is  indelibly 
printed  in  thy  forehead  : 

42  Even  the  old  and  weak  men  became  victims  of 
thy  barbarity ;  thy  servants  stripped  the  aged  Hope, 
and  buffeted  him;  with  the  point  of  their  swords  did 
they  torment  him. 

43  Do  the  groans  of  the  murdered  Kirby  creep  into 
thine  ears  ?  go  thou  and  repent  of  thine  evil,  and  do  so 
no  more  :   the  Lord   God  of   Hosts  shall  be  thy  judge  j 

44  The  generous  people  of  Columbia  may  possibly 
forgive  thy  crimes  against  them  ;  but  the  remembrance 
thereof  shall  live  to  the  end  of  time  ;  neither  shall  th*y 
fcrget  the  name  of  Cockburn. 


H 


8t  LATE 

CHAP.  XXII. 

Russian  mediation — Bayard  and  Gallatin  sail  for  St. 
Petersburgh — the  British  compelled  to  abandon  the 
siege  of  Fart  Meigs. 


T 


HE  lofty  eagle  cutteth  the  air  with  his  wings,  and 
moveth  rapidly  along  ;  the  fish  of  the  deep  glide  swiftly 
through  the  waters ;  the  timid  deer  bounds  through  the 
thick  forests  with  wonderful  speed  : 

2  But  Imagination  surpasseth  them  all  ;  she  ridefh 
•n  the  fleet  winds ;  she  holdeth  a  stream  of  lightning  in 
her  hand. 

3  In  an  instant  she  flieth  from  the  frozen  mountains  of 
Zembla,  in  the  regions  of  the  north,  to  the  burning  sands 
of  Africa  in  the  torrid  zone. 

4  Now  the  sons  of  Columbia  were  peace-makers  ; 
neither  did  their  footsteps  follow  after  warfare. 

5  And,  it  is  written  in  the  holy  scriptures,  Plessed 
are  the  peace-makers,  for  they  shall  be  called  the  chil- 
dren of  God. 

6  So  the  great  Sanhedrim  of  the  people  sent  two  of 
the  wise  men  of  Columbia,  the  one  named  Gallatin  and 
the  other  Bayard,  into  a  distant  country  : 

7  Even  unto  the  extensive  country  of  Russia,  that 
there  they  raisrht  meet  the  wise  men  of  Britain,  and  heal 
the  wounds  of  the  nations,  and  make  peace  with  one 
another. 


WAR.  83 

8  But  the  people  of  Britain  yielded  not  to  the  entrea- 
ties of  the  great  Sanhedrim ;  therefore  the  war  continued 
to  rage. 

9  So  it  carne  to  pass,  on  the  fifth  day  of  the  fifth 
month,  in  the  pleasant  season  of  the  year ;  when  the 
trees  put  forth  their  leaves  and  the  air  is  perfumed  with 
the  sweet  scent  of  flowers,  and  the  blue  violets  bespread 
the  green  hillocks  ; 

10  That  Harrison,  the  chief  eaptain,  from  the  west 
the  brave  warrior,  who  had  entrenched  himself  In  the 
strong  hold  of  Meigs,  nigh  unto  the  river  Miami,  sallied 
forth  against  the  savages  and  the  men  of  Britain,  that 
hemmed  him  in. 

11  Now  there  were  about  a  thousand  soldiers  of  the 
king,  and  a  thousand  savages  that  had  besieged  the  fort 
many  days  j  and  threw  therein  the  balls  of  destruction, 
and  strove  to  make  captive  the  army  of  Columbia. 

12  Nevertheless,  Harrison,  and  his  gallant  little  band, 
fought  hard  against  them,  and  drove  them  from  before 
the  strong  hold  with  great  slaughter. 

13  Likewise,  the  slain  of  Columbia  was  about  four 
score,  besides  the  wounded. 

14  Moreover,  the  chief  captain  gave  great  honour  to 
Miller  and  all  the  captains  and  soldiers  under  him ;  even 
those  called  militia. 

15  And  the  names  of  the  states  of  Ohio  and 
Kentucky  were  raised  high,  by  the  valiant  acts  of  their 
gons  that  dayv 


84  LATE 


CHAP.  XXIIL 

Surrender  of  F&rt  George  and  Fort  Erie  to  the  Amer- 
icans— Gen  Brown  drives  the  British  from  before 
Sacketfs  Harbour  with  great  loss — Gens.  Winder 
and  Chahdier  made  prisoners  at  Forty-mile  Creek. 


N< 


OW,  on  the  twenty-seventh  day  of  the  s;yne 
month,  being  thirty  days  after  Zebulon  had  gone  lo  sleep 
with  his  fathers, 

2  Henry,  whose  sir-name  was  Dearborn,  and  Lew- 
is.* the  chief  captains  of  the  army  of  Columbia,  and 
C  i  ncey  the  commander  f  the  fleet  of  the  United 
States,  that  moved  on  the  waters  of  the  great  lake  On- 
tario, essayed  to  go  against  Fort  George  and  Fort  Eri£^ 
in  the  province  of  the  king 

3  For  they  had  previously  concerted  their  plan  and 
matured  it  ;  and  taken  on  board  the  ships,  the  army  of 
Columbia,  and  a  number  of  the  destroying  engines. 

4  And  when  the  vessels  of  Chauncey  came  nigh  unto 
the  place,  they  let  the  engines  loose  upon  the  fort,  with  a 
roaring  noise. 

5  In  the  meantime  the  army  landed  upon  the  shore, 
and  went  against  the  servants  of  the  kin?. 


*  Gen.  Morgan  Lewie, 


■-WAR.  $$■ 

6,  And  the  men  of  Britain  were  frightened  at  the 
sound  of  the  warring  instruments  that  reached  their 
camp,  and  they  fled  in  dismay,  towards  the  strong  hold 
of  Queenstown. 

7  And  they  destroyed  their  tents,  and  their  store- 
houses, and  put  a  match  to  the  black  dust  of  their  maga- 
zines, and  blew  them  up  into  the  air  :  this  they  did  even 
from  Chippewa  to  Albino. 

8  Moreover,  the  slain  and  wounded  of  the  king  were 
two  hundred  two  score  and  ten ;  of  the  men  of  Colum- 
bia about  tlaee  score  were  slain  and  maimed. 

9  So  the  forts  of  George  and  Erie  were  captured  by 
the  army  and  navy  of  the  United  States. 

10  And  Henry  and  Isaac,  whose  sir-name  was 
Channcey,  spake  well  of  all  the  captains  and  men  that 
fought  with  them. 

11  The  gallant  captains  Scott  and  Forsyth  fought 
.bravely  ;  neither  were  they  afraid. 

12  Boyd,  and  M'Comb,  and  Winder,  and  Chandler, 
and  Porter,  and  a  host  of  heroes,  turned  not  aside  from 
the  heat  of  the  battle. 

13  And  here  the  noble  spirit  of  the  youthful  Perry 
burst  forth  into  view;  a  man  made  to  astonish  the 
world,  and  shower  down  glory  upon  the  arms. of  Colum- 
bia. 

14  Now  it  happened  about  the  same  time,  that  the 
strong  ships  of  Britain  moved  towards  the  other  end 
of  the  lake,  to  the  east  thereof,  and  went  against  a  place 
called   Sackeft's    Harbor. 

15  The  fleet  of  the  king  was  commanded  by  a  chief 
captain  whose  name  was  Yeo  ;  and,  Prevost,  the  .go- 
vernor of  Canada,  commanded  the  army. 


86  LATE 

16  And  on  the  morning  of  the  twenty-ninth  day  of 
the  month,  they  landed  more  than  a  thousand  men  oh 
the  shores  of  Columbia, 

17  Howbeit,  a  certain  valiant  man,  even  Jacob, 
whose  sir-name  was  Brown,  commanded  the  host  of 
Columbia  that  went  against  them  : 

18  And  Jacob,  albeit  a  man  of  peace,*  drove  the 
men  of  Britain,  and  compelled  them  to  flee  rapidly 
from  the  shore,  and  get  them  into  their  vessels. 

19  So  Prevost  and  Yeo  returned  to  the  strong  hold 
of  Kingston. 

20  And  the  skill  of  Jacob,  in  driving  away  the  sol- 
diers of  the  king,  pleased  the  people,  and  they  honoured 
"him  greatly. 

21  Not  many  days  after  these  things,  there  was  a 
sore  battle  fought,  near  to  a  place  called  Forty-mile 
"Greek. 

22  And  it  was  so  that  Winder  an'd  Chandler,  two 
brave  captains  of  the  United  States,  and  about  four 
score  men,  were  coma  upon  unawares  in  the  darkness 
of  the  night,  and  made  captive  by  the  servants  of  the 
king. 

23  After  which  they  were  conveyed  to  the  strong 
hold  of  Montreal,  which  lieth  in  the  province  of  Cana- 
da, on  the  river  St.  Lawrence . 

24  The  officers  and  soldiers  of  Columbia  fought 
bravely,  and  there  were  many  slain  and  wounded  on 
both  sides : 

25  Nevertheless,  the  army  of  the  United  States 
seated  nigh  unto  the  place. 


•  Gen.  Brown  is.a  Quaker, 


WAR-  87 


chap.  xxrv. 

Capture  of  the    Chesapeake — Commodore    Decatur 
blockaded  in  New-London. 


.N  these  days  the  pride  of  Britain  was  sorely  wound- 
ed :  for  she  had  been  discomfited  upon  the  waters  of 
the  great  deep ;  and  disappointment  bad  sharpened  her 
anger. 

2  The  people  of  Columbia  had  triumphed  over  her 
ships  ;  and  ber  mighty  armies  had  gained  no  honors. 

3  Notwithstanding  she  had  made  peace  with  the  na- 
tions of  Europe,  and  her  whole  strength  was  turned 
against  the  people  of  Columbia. 

4  The  prosperity  of  many  hundred  years  had  flatter- 
ed her,  and  she  was  puffed  up  with  the  vanity  thereof-; 
yea,  she  had  forgotten  herself. 

5  So  it  came  to  pass,  on  the  first  day  of  the  sixth 
month,  that  a  certain  strong  ship  of  the  king,  called 
the  Shannon,  appeared  before  the  haven  of  Boston, 
which  lieth  to  the  east. 

6  And  she  bade  defiance  to  the  vessels  of  Columbia} 
for  she  had  prepared  herself  for  the  event. 

7  Now  the  Chesapeake,  a  fighting  ship  of  the  United 
States,  was  nigh  unto  the  place  ;  and  she  was  command- 
ed by  the  brave  Lawrence,  who  had  gained  much  bono*' 
in  the  sight  of  the  people ;  neither  was  he  afraicL 


*8  •  LATE 

8  And  he  went  forth  to  battle  against  the  vessel  of1 
■  the  king,  which  was  commanded  by  Broke,  a  valiant 
.man. 

9  Moreover,  the  mischievous  engines  that  were  in  the 
ship  of  Britain  were  more,  and  the  number  of  their  men 
greater  than  those  of  the  vessel  of  the  United  States. 

10  For  Broke  had  gotten  about  two  hundred  men, 
and  secreted  them  ;  so  that  when  the  hour  of  danger  ar« 
rived  they  might  assist  his  men,  and  fall  unawares  upon 
the  men  of  Lawrence. 

1 1  Nevertheless,  towards  the  going  down  of  the  suns 
the  vessels  drew  nigh  to  each  other. 

12  And  Lawrence  spake  unto  his  officers  and  his 
mariners,  saying : 

13  Now  shall  we  set  our  engines  at  the  work  of  de- 
struction ;  let  the  lire  issue,  out  of  their  mouths,  as  it 
were  like  unto  fiery  dragons. 

14  And  although  their  numbers  be  greater  than  ours, 
.yet  we  may  be  conquerois  ;  for  he  who  is  little  of  spirit 

gaineth  nothing. 

15  But  if,    peradventure,  we  should    be  ovei:,ome, 
.  -  even  then  shall  not  the  sacred  cause  of  Liberty  per- 
ish, neither  shall  the  people  of  Columbia  be  disheart- 
ened. 

16  Also,  your  names  shall  be  recorded  as  the  cham- 
pions of  freedom. 

17  And  the  nations  of  the  earth  shall  learn  with  as- 
tonishment, how  dearly  you  prize  the  inheritance  of  your 
fathers. 

18  Now  when  Lawrence  had  made  an  end  of  speak- 
.-,  Lug,  they  sat  the  destroying  engines  to  work,  and  rushed 
i  o&e  upon  another  like  fierce  tygers. 


WAR.  89 

19  The  fire  and  smoke  were  abundant,  and  tremen- 
dous was  the  noise  that  rent  the  air  and  floated  upon  the 

waters . 

20  And  the  Chesapeake  fell  close  upon  the  Shannon, 
swords  clashed  with  swords,  and  pikes  with  pikes ;  and 
dreadful  was  the  conflict  thereof. 

21  But  the  men  of  Broke  were  more  numerous  than 
the  men  of  Lawrence,  and  overpowered  them,  by  the 
means  of  their  numbers. 

22  Already  had  the  valiant  Lawrence  fallen  ;  his  life- 
blood  flowed  fast ;  still  he  cryed  out  to  his  brave  compan- 
ions, saying  unto  them,  Don't  give  up  the  ship;  his  noble 
spirit  fled,  but  his  name  shall  not  perish. 

23  Moreover,  about  this  time  all  the  officers  of  the 
ship  of  the  United  States  were  either  slain  or  sorely 
wounded;  so  she  was  captured  by  the  vessel  of  the  king. 

24  And  Satan  rose  up  in  the  hearts  of  the  conquerors, 
and  they  shot  the  balls  of  death  down  into  the  hold  of  the 

•vessel  of  the  United   States,  even  against  the  halt  and 
maimed  who  had  surrendered  themselves. 

25  And  when  the  tidings  thereof  reached  the  king- 
dom of  Great  Britain,  the  lords,  the  princes,  the  rulers, 
yea,  all  the  people  were  rejoiced  beyond  measure. 

26  And  they  bade  their  roaring  engines  utter  their 
voices  in  London,  their  chief  cily,  that  had  been  silent 
many  years,  even  those  i»  the  great  tower,*  which  was 
built  by  William  the  Bastard,  more  than  seven  hundred 
years  ago. 


*  On  this  occasion  they  fired  their  tower  guns,ithicji 
had  not  been  done  since  Nelson's  victory. 


90  LATE 

27  Their  joy  was  unbounded,  for  they  had  overcome 
eNE  of  the  strong  ships  of  Columbia. 

28  Now  the  slain  and  the  wounded  on  board  the 
Chesapeake,  were  an  hundred  two  score  and  four  ;  and 
there  fell  of  the  servants  of  the  king  about  two  hun- 
dred. 

29  Amongst  the  slain  of  Columbia  were  also  Augus- 
tus, whose  sir-name  was  Ludlow,  and  another  brave 
officer  whose  name  was  White. 

30  And  when  the  people  of  Columbia  heard  of  a 
truth  that  Lawrence  was  slain,  they  mourned  for  him 
many  days. 

31  His  body  was  conveyed  to  a  place  called  Halifax,, 
in  the  province  of  the  king,  where  they  honoured  his 
memory,  and  buried  him  for  a  while. 

32  But  in  a  short  time  thereafter  his  body  was  taken 
out  of  the  earth,  with  the  body  of  Ludlow,  and  convey- 
ed to  the  city  of  New- York,  for  interment. 

33  And  the  captain's  name  who  volunteered  his  ser- 
vices in  this  act  of  patriotism,  and  who  brought  the 
bodies  away  from  Halifax,  was  Crowningshield,  of 
Salem,  in  the  state  of  Massachusetts. 

34  So  Lawrence  was  buried  in  the  burial-place  of 
his  fathers,  in  his  own  land  :  and  a  great  multitude  of 
people  went  out  to  behold  the  funeral  as  it  passed 
through  the  city. 

35  And  his  valiant  deeds  shall  live  forever  in  the  re- 
membrance of  the  people. 

36  About  this  time,  on  the  fourth  day  of  the  month, 
the  brave  Decatur  essayed  to  go  forth  with  his  vessel 
ypon  the  waters  of  the  mighty  deep. 

Q7  And  the  vessels  that  were   with  him  were  ca!Ie4 


WAR.  fti 

the  United  States,  the  Hornet,  and  the  Macedonian  j 
the  latter  a  strong  ship  which  he  had  captured  from 
the  king. 

38  But  it  was  so,  that  some  large  vessels  of  Britain, 
•arrying  each  of  them  more  than  seventy  of  the  destroy- 
ing engines,  suffered  him  not  to  go  forth. 

39  Moreover,  they  wished  to  retake  the  Macedonian, 
that  they  might  retrieve  the  shame  of  the  capture  there- 
of. 

40  So  the  ships  of  Britain  blockaded  Decatur  and 
his  ships  in  the  haven  of  New-London,  which  lieth  in 
the  state  of  Connecticut,  nigh  unto  a  place  called  Ston  - 
ington,  and  they  remained  there  many  months. 


LATE 


CHAP.  XXV. 

Capture  of  Col.  Boerstler  and  Major  Chapin  whh  their 
command — treatment  of  Prisoners — Major  Qha- 
piris  escape. 


OW  there  was  much  hard  fighting  on  the  borders, 
for  the  nations  were  wroth  against  one  another,  and 
many  men  were  slain  by  the  sword. 

2  But  it  is  written  in  t  tie  bowk  of  Jeremiah  the 
prophet,  that  He  who  is  slain  by  the  sword,  is  better 
than  he  who  is  slain  by  famine. 

3  Nevertheless,  many  of  the  soldiers  of  Columbia. 
suffered  hunger  :  for  they  had  given  unto  them  unwhole- 
some food,  and  a  scanty  fare, 

4  Although,  when  the  servants  of  the  king  became 
captives  to  the  people  of  Columbia,  they  were  kindly 
treated,  and  partook  of  the  fat  of  the  land. 

5  Now  it  came  to  pass,  in  the  second  year  of  the 
war,  on  the  twenty  third  way  of  the  sixth  month, 

6  That  a  captain  of  the  United  States,  whose  sir- 
name  was  lioerstltr,  was  ordered  to  go  forth  from  the 
strong  hold  of  Fort  George,  to  annoy  the  enemy. 

7  And  the  name  of  the  place  where  he  essayed  to  go) 
was  called  Beaver- dams,  being  distant  from  the  strong 
hold  of  Queenstown  about  seventy  furlongs. 


WAR.  93 

S  And  the  namber  of  the  men  of  wax  of  Columbia 
who  followed  after  him  was  little'  more  than  five  hun- 
dred. 

9  But  when  they  came  nigh  unto  the  place,  early  in 
the  morning  of  the  next  day,  lo  !  they  were  encompass- 
ed round  about  by  the  savages  and  soldiers  of  the  king. 

10  Nevertheless,  they  fought  bravely  for  a  time  ;  and 
Dearborn,  the  chief  captain  of  Fort  George,  sent  the 
valiant  Chrystie  to  help  hi.n  out  of  his  snare. 

11  But  Boerstler  and  his  army  had  already  become 
captive  to  the  men  of  Britain. 

12  And  they  made  a  covenant  in  writing,  between 
one  another,  but  the  men  of  Britain  violated  the  cove- 
nant. 

13  Inasmuch  as  they  permitted  the  savages  to  rob  the 
officers  of  their  swords,  and  their  apparel,  yea,  even  the 
shoes  from  off  their  feet. 

14  After  which  the  men  of  Columbia  were  command- 
ed to  go,  in  boats,  down  to  the  strong  hold  of  Kingston,, 
in  the  province  of  the  king. 

15  But  a  certain  brave  captain,  called  Chapin,*  a 
cunning  man  withal,  made  his  escape  in  a  boat,  and  ar- 
rived at  the  strong  hold  of  Fort  George  ;  having,  .by 
ihe  strength  of  his  single  arm,  overpowered  three  of  the 
strong  men  of  Britain. 

*  Major  Chapin. 


$ti  LATE 


chap,  xxvi: 


Capture  of  Fort  Schlosser  and  BlacJc  Rock Gen. 

Dearborn  resigns  his   command  to    Gen.   Boyd,  on 

account  of  sickness the  Six  Nations  of  Indians 

declare  tear  against  Canada. 


A, 


-ND  it-  came  to  pass,  on  the  fourth  day  of  the  seventh 
moHth,  which  is  the  birth  day  of  Columbian  Liberty 
and  Independence, 

2  In  the  dark  and  solemn  hour  of  the  night,  when  the 
deadly  savage  walketh  abroad,  and  the  hungry  wolves 
howl  along  the  forest, 

3  A  band  of  the  men  of  Britain  crossed  over  the 
water  from  Chippawa  to  a  place  called    Fort   Schlosser, 

4  An<*  there  was  a  handful  of  the  men  of  the  United 
States  in  the  place,  whom  they  made  captive,  being 
twelve  in  number. 

5  Likewise,  they  carried  away  the  bread  and  the 
meat,  and  some  of  the  strong  waters;  also  one  of  the 
destroying  engines. 

6  Moreover,  the  engine  which  they  brought  away  was* 
made  partly  of  brass,  partly  of  iron,  and  partly  of  wood. 

7  And  the  weight  of  the  ball  that  issued  out  of  its 
mouth  was  about  two  bantixfed  shekels,  after  the  shekel 
t>i  the  sanctuary. 


WAR,  M 

)  On  the  tenth  day  of  the  same  month  they  also  pass- 
ed over  the  river  Niagara,  towards  a  place  called  Black 
Rock,  and  the  small  band  at  the  place  lied. 

9  And   they  destroyed  the  strong   house,    and  the 
.  camp  with  (ire,  and  carried  away  the  flour,  and  the  saltP 

and  such  tilings  as  they  stood  in  need  of. 

10  If  owever,  while  they  were  yet  carrying  them  a- 
way,  there  came  a  band  of  men  of  the  United  States, 
from  the  village  of  Buffaloe, 

1 1  And  let  their  instruments  of  war  loose  upon  them  ; 
and  smote  them  even  unto  death  ;  albeit,  those  who  were 
not  slain  escaped   with  their  plunder. 

12  And  they  tied  hastily  away,  leaving  nine  of  their 
slain  behind,  and  more  than  half  a  score  of  cap- 
tives. * 

13  The  soldiers  of  the  king  were  commanded  by 
two  men ,  the  one  called  Bishop  and  the  other  Warren, 
and  the  men,  of  Columbia  were  .commanded  by  a  chief 
captain,  named  Porter.* 

14  About  this  time  the  savages  and  the  men  of  war 
of  Britain  assailed  the  guards  and  the  out-posts  near 
unto  Fort  George 

15  Day  after  day  and  night  after  night  did  they  an- 
noy them;    and  many  were  slain  on  both  sides. 

16  And  Dearborn,  the  chief  captain  of  the  fort,  and  of 
the  host  of  Columbia  round  about  Niagara,  became  sick 
and  unable  to  go  out  to  battle. 

IT  So  Eoyd,  a  brave  and  tried  warrior,  was  made 
hief  captain  in  his  stead,  until  Wilkinson,  the  chief 
captain,  arrived  :  and  the  gallant  Fraser  was  appointed 
one  of  his  aids. 

*  Gc»,  P.  R  Porter, 


#6  LATE 

18  Now  there  wore  some  amongst  the  tribes  of  the 
savages,  who  had  been  instructed  in  the  ways  gf  God, 
and  taught  to  walk  in  the  path  of  righteousness  ; 

19  For  the  chief  governor  of  the  land  of  Columbia, 
and  the  great  Sanhedrim  of  the  people,  had  taken  them 
under  their  care. 

20  And  sent  good  men  amongst  them  to  preach  the 
gospel,  and  instruct  them  in  the  sublime  doctrine  of  the 
Saviour  of  the  world. 

21  And  they  hearkened  unto  the  preachers,  and  were 
convinced,  and  their  natures  were  softened. 

22  Amongst  these  tribes  were  those  who  were  called 
the  Six  nations  of  New  York  Indians  ; 

23  And  their  eyes  were  opened,  and  they  saw  the 
evil  and  wickedness  of  Britain. 

24  So  their  chiefs  and  their  counsellors  rose  up  and 
flfade  war  against  the  province  of  Canada,  and  fought 
against  the  hired  savages  of  the  king  pf  Britain. 

25  But  in  all  their  acts  they  suffered  not  the  spirit  of 
barbarians  to  rule  over  them. 

26  They  remembered  the  good  counsel  given  to  them 
hy  their  aged  chief.* 

27  And  when  the  red  savages  and  the  men  of  Britain 
fell  into  their  hands,  they  raised  neither  the  tomahawk 
nor  the  scalping  knife. 

28  Nay,  they  treated  them  kindly ;  and  those  who 
were  slain  in  battle  they  disturbed  not ;  and  their  human- 
ity exceeded  the  humanity  of  the  white  men  of  Britain. 


*  Alluding  to  an   eloquent  speech,  delivered  about 
that  time,  to  the  Six  NationSyby  one  of  their  old  toar* 

riors. 


V/AR.  97 


CHAP.  XXVII. 

Affairs  on  hake  Ontario,  between  the  fie eU  of  Com 
Chauncey  and  Sir  James  Yeo. 


I 


N  those  da\-s,  the  great  waters  of  the  lake  Ontario 
were  troubled  with  the  movements  of  the  fighting  ships 
of  Columbia,  as  well  as  those  of  the  king. 

2  Now  the  fleet  of  the  king,  which  was  commaaded 
by  Yeo,  who  was  a  skilful  captain,  was  greater  than  the 
fleet  of  Columbia,  which  was  commanded  by  the  brave 
Chauncey. 

3  And  the}'  had  contrived  to  move  to  and  fro  upon  the 
feosom  of  the  lake  Ontario  many  months, 

4  And  two  of  the  small  vessels,  called  the  Julia  and 
the  Growler,  being  parted  from  the  fleet,  fell  into  the 
hands  of  Yeo. 

5  Nevertheless,  Chauncey  followed  after  Yeo,  and 
hemmed  him  in. for  a  tine. 

6  But  a  strong  west  wind  arose  and,j.he  fleets  were 
again  separated. 

;7  Alter  thisx!hauncey  captured  a  number  of  small 
fighting  vessels,  and  about  three  hundred  soldiers  of  the 
king. 

8  Now  it  was  so,  that  when  Yeo  put  his  fleet  in  battle 
array,  as  though  he  would  fight, 

9  Then  Chauncey  went  out  against  him,  to  meet  him, 
and  give  him  battle  ;  btU  •  vhe  heart  of  Yeo  failed  him 

and  he  turned  aside  from  the  ships  of  Columbia. 

i  2 


^S  LATE 

10  So  Chauncey  sailed  along  the  borders  of  the  lake, 
"from  the  one  end  to  the  other  ;  even  from  Niagara  to 
Sackett's  Harbour,  and  Yeo  followed  him  not. 

1 1  Now  all  the  vessels  of  the  king,  and  all  the  ves- 
sels of  the  United  States,  that  carried  the  destroying  en- 
gines, upon  the  lake  Ontario,  being  numbered  were  about 

seventeen. 

12  Howsoever,  they  cut  down  the  tall  trees  of  the 
forest,  and  hewed  them,  and  built  many  more  strong 
vessels  ;  although  they    had   no  gophar-wood  amongst 

hem  in  these  days. 

13  And  they  made  stories  to  them,  even  to  the  third 
sxory,  and  they  put  windows  in  them,  and  they  pitched 
them  within  and  without  with  pitch ;  after  the  fashion  of 
the.  ark. 

14  And,  lo  !  some  of  the  ships  which  they  built  upon 
the  lake,  carried  about  an  hundred  of  the  engines  of 
death. 

15  And  the  weight  of  a  ball  which  they  vomited  forth 
was  about  a  thousand  shekels. 

16  Now  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Chauncey  and  Yeo, 
-which  they  did,  are  they  not  written  in  the  book  of  Pal- 
mer, the  scribe  ?* 

*  Historical  Register,  an  excellent  publication,  in 
4  vols,  octavo,  printed  in  Philadelphia,  1 816,  which 
contains  the  facts  and  the  official  documents  of  the  late 
■war. 


WAR.  &) 


CHAP.  XXVIH. 


Affairs  on  Lake  Champlain — pillage  ofPlattsburgh  Li- 
the British — bombardment  of  Burlington — depreda- 
tions committed  in  the  Chcscpeake,  and along  the  coast. 


N, 


OW  the  fighting  vessels  of  Britain  began  to  appear 
upon  the  lake,  called  by  the  ancient  Gauls,  Champlain. 

2  And  the  vessels  of  war  of  Columbia  that  were  upon 
the  waters  of  the  lake  were  not  yet  prepared  for  the 
battle;  the  name  of  their  commander  was  M'DonoHgh^ 
a  stripling. 

3  So,  it  came  to  pass,  on  the  thirty  and  first  day  of 
the  seventh  month,  that  the  vessels  of  the  king  came  for- 
ward against  Plattsburgh,  whieh  lieth  on  the  borders  of 
the  lake. 

4  And  there  were  none  to  defend  the  place ;  for  the 
army  of  Hampton,  a  chief  captain  of  the  United  States, 

was  encamped  upon  the  opposite  side  of  the  lake,  at  a 
place  called  Burlington,  in  the  state  of  Vermont. 

5  And  the  number  of  the  soldiers  of  the  king  that  land- 
ed at  Plattsburgh  was  more  than  a  thousand  men,  and 
the  name  of  their  chief  captain  was  Murray. 

■o  And  a  captain  of  the  United  States,  whose  name 
was  Mocers,  a  man  of  valor,  strove  to  gather  tocher 


iOO  LATE 

-the  husbandmen    of  the  place  ;   but  they  were  not'^ 
nough. 

7  So  the  army  of  the  king  captured  the  place ;  and 
ihe  men  of  Columhia   fled   before   the  men  of  Britain. 

8  Moreover,  the  wickedness  which  had  been  commit- 
ted  at  Hampton,was  noised  abroad,  even  from  the 
shores  of  Virginia  to  lake  Champlain. 

9  Accordingly,  all  the  women  and  children,  who 
were  able,"  suddenly  departed  from  the  place,  lest  the 
same  thing  might,  peradventure,  happen  unto  them. 

10  Neither  were  they  deceived  in  judgment ;  for,  lo  ! 
when  the  place  was  given  up, and  a  covenant  made,  the 
servants  of  the  king  proved  faithless. 

11  They  abided  not  by  the  contract :  saying,  Pish  !  ye 
are  but  yankees,  therefore  will  we  do  to  you  as  seemeth 
meet  unto  us  ! 

12  So  they  burnt  the  houses,  and  ail  other  things  be- 
longing to  the  United   States,  with  fire. 

13  After  which  they  fell  upon  the  merchandise,  the 
goods,  and  the  chatties  of  ail  manner  of  persons  :  Ray  the 
persons  of  some  of  the  women  were  abused  : 

14  Meanwhile  they  forced  othcis  to  put  the  burning 
brand  to  their  own  dwellings;  or  pay  them  tribute. 

15  They  killed  the  cattle,  and  prepared  them  food  ; 
and  after  they  had  eaten  and  drank,  they  overturned 
the  tables. 

16  So,  when  their  vengeance  Avas  crfrr.pleted,  they 
•departed  to  other  places  and  committed  like  evils. 

17  About  the  same  time  the  vessels  of  the  king  that 
sailed  on  the  lake,  went  against  the  town  of  IJurik»gton, 
•where  the  army  of  Hampton  was. 

J 8  But  when  the  men  of  Columbia  began  to  let  the 


WAiR.  101 

destroying  engines  loose  upon  them,  from  the  strong  hold 
before  the  town,  they  fled  in  dismay. 

19  Now  while  these  things  were  passing  in  the  north, 
the  greedy  sons  of  Britain  were  laying  desolate  the  small 
villages  of  the  south. 

20  On  the  waters  of  the  Chesapeake  they  captured 
the  small  vessels  and  made  spoil  thereof. 

21  Moreover,  they  gat  possesion  of  a  small  place 
called  Kent  Island,  and  robbed  the  poor  and  needy;  for 
There  was  no  mercy  in  them, 

22  Yea,  it  was  said  of  a  truth,  and  talked  abroad,  that 
they  came  in  the  night  time,  and  disturbed  the  small 
cattle,  and  the  fowls,  and  took  them  for  their  own  use, 
and  crawled  away  like  men  ashamed  ; 

23  Thus  committing  a  sin,  by  violating  the  eighth 
commandment  of  God,  which  saith,  Thou  shalt  not 
STEAL. 

24  Even  the  state  of  North-Carolina  escaped  them 
not  ;  they  landed  a  thousand  men  of  war  at  a  place  call- 
ed Ocracocke. 

25  And  again  the  work  of  destruction  began  ;  they 
spread  terror  and  dismay  whithersoever  they  went. 

26  They  troubled  the  men  of  Columbia  all  along  the 
sea  coast,  which  is  more  than  eight  thousand  furlongs, 
from  north  to  south. 

27  Moreover,  they  gat  much  plunder  :  even  much  oi. 
the  good  things  with  which  the  land  of  Colombia 
abounded]. 


102  LATE 


CHAP  XXIX. 

Major  Croghau  defeats  the  British  and  Indians,  under 
Gen.  Proctor,  in  their  attack  en  Fort  Stephenson, 
Lower  Sandusky. 


E V  ERTIIELESS,  it  came  to  pass,  that  Harisoa, 
the  chief  captain  of  the  north  west  army,  had  placed 
a  captain,  a  young  man,  in  the  hold  called  Fort  Stephen- 
son, to  defend  it. 

2  Now  the  fort  lieth  at  the  western  end  of  the  great 
lake  Erie,  at  a  place  called  Sandusky. 

3  A,&d, the,  number  x>f  the  soldiers  that  were  with  th£ 
youth  in  the  held  was  about  an  hundred  and  three  score, 
and  they  had  only  one  of  the  destroying  engines. 

4  Now  the  name  of  the  young  man  was  George,  anil 
his  sir-name  was  Croghan. 

5  So,  on  the  first  day  of  the  eighth  month,  about  the 
going  down  of  the  sun,  a  mighty  host  from  Maiden  ap- 
peared before  the  hold  ; 

6  Even  a  thousand  savages,  and  about  five  hundred 
men  of  war  of  Britain  ;  and  Proctor  was  the  commander 
thereof. 

7  Moreover,  they  brought  the  instruments  of  destruc- 
tion in  great  plenty  even  howitzers,  which  weie  not 
sjenown  in  the  days  of  the  rhi'.dren  of  Israel. 

S   -hid  they   hsd  prepared  themselves  for  the  fight? 


WAR.  10$ 

afnd  encompassed  the  place  round  about,  both  by  land" 
and  by  water. 

9  After  which  Proctor  sent  a  message  to  the  brave 
Croghan,  by  a  captain  whose  name  was  Elliot,  and  the 
words  thereof  were  in  this  sort  : 

10  Lo  !  now  ye  can  neither  move  to  the  right  nor  to 
the  left,  to  escape,  for  we  have  hemmed  you  in  ; 

1 1  Therefore,  that  your  Mood  may  not  be  spilt  in  vain, 
we  command  that  ye  give  up  the  strong  bold  into  the 
hands  of  the  servants  of  the  king,  and  becorae  captives. 

12  We  have  the  destroying  engines  in  abundance,  and- 
we  are  a  numerous  host. 

13  Furthermore,  if  ye  refuse  then  shall  the  wild  sa- 
vages be  let  loose  upon  you  ;  and  there  shall  b-e  none  left 
among  you  to  go  and  tell  the  tidings  thereof, 

14  But  when  Croghan  heard  the  message,,  lie  answer- 
ed and  said  unto  Elliot,  (jet  thee  now  to  thy  chief  cap- 
tain, and  say  unto  him,  I  refuse  ;  neither  will  I  hearken 
unto  him  : 

15  And  if  it  be  so,  that  he  come  against  me  with  his 
whole  host,  even  then  will  I  not  turn  aside  from  the 
fierce  battle ;  though  his  numbers  were  as  the  sand  on 
the  sen  shore. 

iG  Lo!  David,  of  old,  with  a  sling  a'ud  a  stone,  slew 
the  mighty  Goliah  :  and  shall  the  people  of  Columbia  be 
afraid,  and  bow  before  the  tyrants  of  Europe  ? 

If  Then  Elliot  returned  to  the  army  of  the  king :  and 
immediately  the  mouths  of  their  engines  were  opened 
against  the  fort. 

18  And  the  noise  thereof  continued  a  long  time :  even 
until    the  next  day  ;  but  their  battering  prevailed  not. 

19  Now  when  Proctor  saw  it  was  of  no  avail,   he  di- 


l©4  LATE 

vided  his  host  into  two  bands,  and  appointed  a  captain  to 
each  band  ;  and  they  moved  towards  the  fort  and  assail- 
ed it  with  great  violence. 

20  But  the  men  of  Croghan  were  prepared  for  them  ; 
and  they  let  loose  their  weapons  of  war  upon  them,  and 
set  their  destroying  engine  to  work,  and  smote  the  men 
of  Britain,  hip  and  thigh,  with  great  slaughter. 

21  And  the  deep  ditch  that  surrounded  the  fort  was 
strewed  with  their  slain  and  their  wounded. 

23  So  the  host  of  Britain  were  dismajed  and  over- 
thrown, and  fled  in  confusion  from  the  fort  into  the  for_ 
est  ;  from  whence,  in  the  dead  of  the  night,  they  went  in- 
to their  vessels,"  and  departed  from  the  place. 

23  Now  the  loss  of  the  men  of  Britain  was.  about  an 
hundred  two  score  and  ten  ;  and  of  the  men  of  Columbia 
there  was  one  slain  aud  seven  wounded. 

24  But  when  Proctor  had  rested  his  army  he  sent  a 
skilful  physician  to  heal  the  maimed  which  he  had  fled 
from  and  left  behind. 

25  But  Hanson,  the  chief  captain,  said  unto  him,  Al- 
ready have  my  physicians  bound  up  their  wounds,  and 
given  them  bread  and  wine,  and  comforted  them  ; 
after  the  manner  of  our  country. 

26  For  we  suffer  not  the  captives  that  fall  into  our 
hands  to  be  buffeted  or  maltreated  j  neither  want  they 
for  any  thing. 

27  So  the  physician  of  the  king's  army  was  permitted 
to  return  to  his  own  camp. 

28  Moreover,  great  honor  and  praise  were  bestowed 
upon  the  brave  Croghan,  the  captain  of  the  fort,  for  his 
valiant  deeds ;  and  his  name  was  spoken  of  with  joy 
throughout  the  land  of  Columbia. 


WAR.  105.- 


CHAP.  XXX. 


British  schooner'  Dominica,  of  14  Guns,  captursdbtt 
t.';?j>rcva'ecr  Decatur,  of  7  guns — U.  S.  brig  Argus 
captured  by  the  Pelican — capture  of  the  Boxer  by 
ike  U.  S.  brig  Enterprize. 


-Lit  OW  the  war  continued  to  rage  without  abatement 
upon  the  waters  of  the.  great   deep  ; 

2  And  manifold  were  the  evils  that  came  upon  the 
children  of  men  by  the  means  thereof* 

3  Moreover,  the  great  Sanhedrim  of  the  people 
were  forced  to  bestir  themselves ;  and  they  had  con- 
tinued their  councils  day  after  day  without  ceasing. 

4  And  it  came  to  pass,  that  there  was  a  dreadful 
battle  fought  between  a  vessel  of  the  king,  and  a  private 
vessel  ©f  Columbia;, 

5  And  the  name  of  the  vessel  that  fought  was  De- 
catur., and  the  captain's  name  was  Diron,  a  Gaul. 

6  And  it  was  so,  that  about  the  fourth  day  of  the 
eighth  month,  the  Decatur  having  sailed  out  of  the  ha- 
ven of  Charleston,  being  in  the  state  of  Soulh  Carolina, 
fell  in  with  one  of  the  fighting  vessels  of  the  king,  called 
the  Dominica. 

7  But  the  destroying  engines  of  the  king's  vessel 
were  two  fold  greater  in  numbers  than  those  of  the 
Decatur. 

K 


106  LATE 

8  Nevertheless,  they  set  them  to  work,  so  that  they 
groaned  beneath  the  fire  and  smoke  ; 

9  And  in  about  the  space  of  an  hour  the  Dominica 
was  conquered  and  taken  captive. 

10  For  when  the  vessels  came  close  together,  the 
nien  smote  one  another  with  their  swords  and  weapons 
of  war  ;  yea,  even  the  balls  of  iron  they  cast  at  each 
other,  with  their  hands,  and  slew  one  another  with 
wonderful  slaughter. 

11  Inasmuch  as  there  were  slaia  and  maimed  of  the 
Icing  thiee  score  souls;  those  of  the  Decatur  were 
about  a  score  :  moreover  the  captain  of  the  Dominica 
Was  slain. 

12  The  fight  was  an  unequal  one;  and  the  bravery 
of  Diron  gained  him  a  great  name,  for  he  overcame  the 
enemies  of  freedom  ;  although  their  force  was  greater 
than  his. 

13  After  this,  on  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  same 
month,  there  was  another  sore  battle  between  a  small 
vessel  of  the  United  States,  called  the  Argus  and  the 
Pelican,  a  ship  of  the  king. 

14  Now  the  Pelican  was  somewhat  stronger  than  the 
Argus,  and  they  were  stubborn  and  kept  the  destroying 
©ngincs  to  work,  with  great  noise  about  forty  and  five 
minutes. 

15  And  the  brave  captain  of  the  \rsrus,  whose  name 
was  Allen,  was  wounded  unto  death,  wd  the  vessel  of 
Columbia  was  captured  by  the  shin  o''  Britain,  the  name 
of  the  commander   whereof  was  Maples. 

16  Of  the  men  of  Columbia  six  were  slain  and 
seventeen  wounded ;  of  the  men  ©f  Britain  the  slaic 
and  wounded  were  five. 


WAR.  ior 

-<7  Nov/  the  death  of  Allen  was  .spoken  of  with  scr- 
row  throughout  the  land  of  Columbia,  for  he  had  de? 
fended  the  vessel  of  the  United  States  nobly  ;  and  cap- 
tured some  merchant   ships  of  Britain, 

IS  Even  the  enemy  regarded  him  for  his  bravery, 
for  they  buried  him  with  honour  in  their  own  country,, 
not  far  from  the  place  where  he  became  captive,  which 
vas  in  the  waters  of  the  king,  even  in  St.  George's, 
Channel. 

.19  But  it  came  to  pass,  on  the  fifth  day  of  the  next 
month,  in  the  same  year, 

20  That  a  certain  small  vessel  of  Columbia,  carrying 
the  engines  of  destruction,  commanded  by  a  gallant 
man,  whose  name  was  Burrows,  fell  in  with  an- 
other small  vessel  of  the  king,  called  the  Boxer  and 
the  captain  thereof  was  a  brave  man,  and  his  name  was 
Clythe. 

21  In  the  language  of  the  people  of  the  lapd,  the 
vessel  of  Columbia   was  called  the  Enterprize. 

22  Now  when  the  vessels  drew  nigh  unto  each  other 
the  men  shouted  with  loud  shouting. 

^3  And  immediately  they  let  the  mischievous  engines 
loose  upon  one  another,  with  a  noise  like  unto  thunder. 

24  But  it  happened,  that  in  about  the  space  of  forty 
minutes,  the  Boxer  was  overcome  ;  but  she  was  taken 
somewhat  unawares  :  • 

23  For,  lo  !  the  pride  of  the  men  of  Britain  had  made 
them  foolish  :  and,  thinking  of  the  conquest,  they  nailed 
Britannia's  red-cross  to  the  mast  of  the  vessel. 

26  Whereupon,  after  they  were  overcome,  they  cried 
ajdud  for  mercy,  saying, 


103  LATE 

27  Behold  !  our  colors  are  fast  ;  and  we  canno. 
quickly  unloose  them;  nevertheless,  we  will  be  prisoner:} 
unto  you ,  therefore  spare  us. 

28  So  the  brave  mariners  of  Columbia  spared  them, 
and  stopped  the  destroying  engines  ;  for  their  hearts 
were  inclined  to  mercy. 

29  However,  this  was  another  bloody  fight  ;  fur 
there  fell  of  the  men  of  Britain  forty  that  were  slain  out- 
right, and  seventeen  were  wounded. 

30  And  the  loss  of  Columbia  in  slain  and  maimed 
was  about  fourteen. 

31  And  the  commanders  of  both  vessels  were  slain  ; 
and  they  buried  them  w  th  honor  hi  the  town  of  Port- 
land, which  leaveth  Boston  to  the  west ;  for  the  battle 
was  fought   hard  by. 

32  Moreover,  the  great  Sanhedrim  wns  pleased  with 
the  thing,  and  gave  unto  the  .lear^st  kinsman  of  Borrows 
a  medal  of  gold,  in  token  of  remembrance  thereof.* 


*  Mathew  L.  D'tvis,  of  New-York,  a  printer, 
a  patriot ,  and  a  philant  ropist,  on  a  tour  in  the  eastern 
States,  passing  through  Portland  and  the  burial  place 
of  Burrows  (which  wis  without  a  memorial,)  being 
pointed  out  to  him,  generously  delayed  his  journey 
Until,  at  his  own  expense,  he  had  caused  a  monument 
to  be  erected  over  the  grave  of  the  valiant  ;  which 
bears  the  following  inscription,  equally  creditable  tv 
the  modest  merit  of  Mir;  Davis. — to  his  head.  and.  ift 
■his  heart : 


WaK  ~k<09 


CHAP.  XXXL 

IHie  capture  of  ihe  British  Fleet  on  Lake  Erie  jhy  the 
American  Fleet,  under  Com.  Perry. 


HE  Lord,  in  the  plenitude  of  his  wisdom  and  pow- 
er, ordaineth  all  things  which  come  to  pass:  and  the 
doings  are  for  the  benefit  of  man,  and  for  the  glory  oi 
God. 

2  For  where  is  the  evil  which  hath  not  turned  to  an  ad- 
vantage, and  been  a  warning',  and  swallowed  up  the  evil 
that  might  have  come  ? 

BENEATH    THIS    STONE 

Moulders 

THE     BODY    OF 

W  ILL  I A  M    B  U  it  R  0  W S, 
Late  Commander  of  the 
-UNITED  STVTES'    BRIG  ENTERP.U7jE, 
Who  was  mortally   wounded  oathe.§th  of  September, 
•  I$13,  in  an  action,   which  contributed  to   increase 
the  fame  of  American   valour,  by  caplirrmj  his 
BRIT.  MAJESTY'S  BRIG   BOXER; 
after  a  severe  contest  of  45  minutes. 
<A  passing"  stranger  has  erected  this  monument  of  respect 
to  the  manes  of  a  patriot,,  wbo  in  the  hour   oi  peril, 
,  obeyed  the  loud  summons  of  ;<n  injured  country,  and 
who  galhuitly  met,  fought  and  conquered  the  foeman, 

k  2 


110  LATE 

3  Now  about  this  time  the  strong  vessels  of  Columbia 
that  moved  upon  the  face  of  the  blue  waters  of  the  great 
lake  Eiie,  were  given  in  charge  to  Oliver,  whose  sir- 
name  was  Pei  ry. 

4  And  he  was  a  prudent  man,  and  had  prepared  him- 
self to  meet  the  vessels  of  the  king,  even  forty  days  before- 
hand. 

5  And  the  name,  of  of  the  captain  of  the  fleet  of  Bri- 
tain was  Barclay,  a  maa  of  great  valor  ;  but  he  boasted 
and  was  vain  of  his  fleet,  for  it  was  more  powerful 
than  the  fleet  of  Columbia. 

6  Nevertheless,  it  came  to  pass,  in  the  one  thousand 
eight  hundred  and  thirteenth  year,  on  the  tenth  day  of 
the  ninth  month,  early  in  the  morning,  about  the  rising 
of  the  sun, 

7  The  valiant  Perry  beheld  the  fleet  of  the  king  at  a 
distance  upon  the  lake ;  so  he  unmoored  his  vessels 
and  went  out  to  meet  them  in  battle  array,  fleet  against 
fleet. 

8  And  when  their  white  sails  were  spread  upon  the 
bosom  of  the  lake,  they  appeared  like  unto  a  squadron  of 
passing  clouds. 

9  A  gentle  breeze  wafted  the  hostile  vessels  towards 
one  another. 

10  It  was  silence  upon  the  waters;  save  when  the 
•sound  of  musical   instruments  fell   sweetly    upon    the 

ear. 

11  But  it  happened,  a  Utile  before  the  midday,  that 
the  shouts  of  the  men  of  war  oJ  Britain  were  heard,  and 

.the  shouts  of  the  men  of  Columbia. 

12  And  now  the  destroying  ^engines  began  tj   utter 


WAR.  Ill 

their  thunders  vomiting  forth  fire  and  smoke  and  brim- 
stone in  abundance. 

13  And  suddenly  the  waters  were  in  an  uproar  ;  and 
the  bellowing  noises  sounded  along  the  lake. 

1-1  Moreover,  the  chief  force  of  the  ship?  of  the  king 
was  put  against  the  vessel  in  which  Perry  was  ; 

15  And' the  vessel  was  called  the  Liwrence,  after  a 
brave  man,  whose  dying  words  waved  upon  her   aloft  : 

16  Now,  behold,  a  thousand  balls  of  iron  skim  the 
surface  of  the  waters,  swift  as  shooting  stars. 

17  But  when  the  battle  waxed  hot,  and  Perry  saw 
that  the  tackling  of  his  vessel  was  shot  away,  and  his  men 
were  slain  and  wounded  with  great  slaughter,  and  his  des- 
troying engines  became  silent, 

1 S  He  put  the  charge  of  the  vessel  into  the  hands  of 
one  of  his  officers,  whose  name  was  Yaraell,  a  trusty  man  j 

19  Then,  with  the  starry  banner  of  Columbia  in  his 
band,  did  the  gallant  Perry  leap  into  his  cock-boat,  while 
his  brave  mariners  quickly  conveyed  him  to  another 
fighting  vessel  of  the  United  States  called  the  Niagara, 
commanded  by  a  valiant  m  in,  whose  name  was   "Elliot. 

20  After  this  again  the  vessels  uttered  heir  thunders 
and  fought  hard,  and  the  men  of  Columbia  poured  out 
destruction  upon  die  servants  of  the  king. 

21  And  it  came  to  pass,  that  the  skilful  contrivance  of 
Perrv,  and  the  bravery  of  his  men,  at  length  forced  the 
whole  fleet  of  the  king  to  become  captive— even  unto  the 
cock  boats  of  Columbia. 

22  Fhtts  again  was  the  mighty  lion  humbled  before 
.the  eagle  :  lor  six  strong  vessels  of  iiritaiu  were  overcome 

a!  one  time. 


tm  LATE 

'23  And  the  slain  and  wounded  of  the  king  that  day, 
was  about  an  hundred  thirty  and  five ;  beside  there  were 
a^housand  prisoners. 

24  The  loss  of  the  United  States  was> twenty  and  se- 
ven that  were  killed,  and  four  score  and  ten  were  wound- 
ed. 

25  Moreover,  the  number  of  the  men  of  Britain  made 
captive  was  more  than  all  the  men  of  Perry's  squadron. 

26  Now  Perry  was  a  righteous  man,  and  like  the  good 
Samaritan,  took  care  of  the  halt  and  maimed,  and  put 
skilful  men  to  bind  up  their  wounds  ;  and  the  men .  of 
Britain  blessed  him. 

.27  Neither  was  he  a  man  puffed  up  with  vanity,  even 
"in  the  hour  of  victory  ; 

28  For  when  he  had  conquered  the  fleet  of  Britain, 
lie  wrote  to  Jones,*  one  of  the  scribes  of  the  great  San- 
hedrim, with  modesty,  saying, 

29  To  day  it  hath  pleased  the  Lord  that  the  people  of 
Columbia  should  triumph  over  their  enemies. 

30  At  the  same  time  he  wrote  to  Harrison,  the  chief 
captain  of  the  host  of  Columbia,  whose  army  was  at  the 
bay  of  Sandusky,  saying,  \\c  have  met  the  enemy,  and 
tfhey  are  ours  ! 

3 1  Then  did  the  enemies  of  Columbia  weep  ;  and  the 
rgainsayer  put  on  deep  mourning. 

32  Moreover,  the  great  Sanhedrim  honored  Perry  with 
<great  honor ;  and  gave  him. medals,  with  devices  curious- 
ly wrought. 

33  Likewise,  the  people  gave  him  much  silver  plate, 
■With  gravings  thereon,  mentioning  his  deeds. 

34  And  the  by e-stander  might  read  his  triumph;.-,  his 
,  Country's  eyes. 


WAR.  IIS 

33  His  sons  shall  hear  him  spoken  of  with  pleasure, 

and  his  name  shall  be  mentioned  in  the  song  oftae  virgins. 
36  Where,  oh  !  Bratain,  are  now  thy  mighty   admi- 
rals ?  where  thy  Nelson  ?  where  the  transcendant  glory 
they  gained  for  thee  ? 

57  Alas  !   it  hath  expired  upon  the  waters  of  Erie  be- 
■fore  the  destroyin  y  engir.es  of  Perry  ! 

*  }F.  Jones,  Secretary  of  tJie  Navy, 


««S*»r« 


114  LATE 


CHAP.  XXXII. 

Capture  of  Maiden  and  Detroit — the  army  of  Gap. 
Proctor  -retreat  towards  the  Moravian  towns — Gen. 
Harrison  pursues  them. 


IS" 


OW  when  Perry  had  taken  care  of  the  captives, 
and  the  wounded,  and  set  them  upon  the  shore, 

%  He  began  to  convey  the  army  of  Harrison  from 
STort  Meigs  and  round  about. 

3  And  having  gathered  them  together  into  his  vessels, 
he  brought  them,  and  landed  them  nigh  unto  the  strong 
hold  of  Maiden. 

4  And  it  came  to  pass,  on  the  twenty-third  clay  of 
the  same  month,  in  which  Perry  conquered  the  fleet  of 
Britain, 

5  That  Harrison,  the  chief  captain,  began  to  march 
the  host  of  Columbia  against  the  strong  hold  of  Maiden, 
and  captured  a  town  called  Amherstburg,  nigh  there- 
unto. 

6  Now  Proctor  was  the  chief  captain  of  the  savages 
and  servants  of  the  king. 

7  And  when  he  saw  the  men  of  Columbia  approach, 
he  destroyed  the  fort,  the  tents,  and  the  store-houses 
of  the  king,  and,  with  his  whole  host,  fled  swiftly 
towards  Sandwich. 


WAR.  143 

8'  And  Harrison,  and  the  host  of  Columbia,  followed 
hard  after  him. 

9  Now  when  the  savages  of  the  wilderness  beheld 
the  men  of  Britain  flee  before  the  warriors  of  Columbia, 
their  spirits  sunk,  and  tliey  were  sore  amazed.* 

10  Moreover,  they  upbraided  the  servants  of  the  king, 
saying,  Lo  !  ye  have  deceived  us,  and  led  us  from  our 
hunting  grounds,  and  we  are  anhungered. 

11  For,  verily,  ye  promised  us  bre  id  and  wiue,f  and 
silver  and  gold  ;  yea, even  that  we  should  drink  of  the 
strong  waters  of  Jamaica,  if  we  would  go  out  with  you 
and  fight  the  battles  of  the  king,  against  the  men  of 
Columbia. 

11  But,  behold  !  now  ye  would  run  away  aixl  leave 
us  to  fight  alone. 

13  Whereupon  many  of  their  tribes  cast  away  their 
tomahawks,  and  refused  to  fight  under  the  banners  of 
the  king. 

14  And  when  Harrison  came  to  Sandwich,  Procter 
and  his  army  had  departed  from  the  place,  and  fled  to- 
wards the  riv^r  Thames,  near  Moravian   Town. 

15  (Now  the  Thames  emptieth  its  waters  into  the 
lake  St.  Clair,  and  the  .Moravian  Towns  lie  upon  the 
river,  about  an  hundred  miles  from  Maiden,  towards  the 
north,  in  the  province  of  Upper  Canada.) 

16  Moreover,  as  they  joarnied  on,  the  brave  M'Ar- 
thur  crossed  over  with  his  band  to  the  strong  hold  of 
Detro't,  and  took  it. 


*  See  Tecumseh's  letter  to  Proctor. 

i  At  t/iis  time  the  British  army  were  short  of  supplies. 


215  LATE 

17  But  the  savages  and  the  men  of  Britain  had  sfe6- 
stroyed  those  things  which  they  could  not  carry  away, 
and  fled  in  haste. 

18  So  M'Arthur,  in  whom  the  chief  captain  piif 
mack  faith,  remained  at  Detroit  in  the  charge  thereof. 

19  And  it  came  to  pass,  when  Harrison  saw  that  the 
host  of  Britain  fled  before  him.  lie  departed  from  Sand- 
wich and  went  after  them  ;  it  being  on  the  second  day 
of  the  next  month. 

20  Aud  his  whole  army  followed  after  him,  in  all  a- 
bout  three  thousand  brave  men  from  the  back-woods  of  • 
the  state  of  Kentucky  and  the  pleasant  villages  of. 
Ohio. 

21  Now  Harrison  was  a  mighty  man  of  valor,  and  vo 
man  could  make  him  afraid  ;  aud  the  caj  tains  and  ofl- 
cers  that  were  with  him  were  all  valiant  num. 

22  An:\,  when  some  of  ids  captains  said  unto  him,  Lo  ! 
i*  ere  is  a  feast  to  day  :  go  thou  and  par-take  thereof, 
and  refresh  thyself,  and  we  will  watch  ; 

23  He  answered  and  s'aid  unjo  t-  em,  Nay,  shall  I  go 
and  riot,  whilst  the  warriors  of  Columbia  die  on  the  fro- 
zen ground'  ? 

24  No,  their  fate  shall  be  my  fate  ;  and  their  glory 
shall  be  my  glory. 

25  So  he  wrapped  himself  in  his  cloak,  and  lay  down 
in  his  own  tent. 

26  And  the  husbandmen  of  Kentucky  were  led  on 
by  their  valiant  governor,  whose  name  was  Shelby, 
and  he  was  a  man  well  stricken  in  yeans ;  even  at  the 
age  of  threescore  did  he  go  out  against  the  enemies  of  CV 
liunbia;  and  all    the    people    rejoiced  in    him. 


WAR.  127 

27  And  the  gallant  Perry  staid  not  behind  ;  but  freely 
offered  his  strength,  and  was  one  of  the  right  hand  men 
of  Harrison,  with  whom  he  followed  after  the  host  of 
Britain. 

28  Nevertheless,  it  happened  that  a  band  of  the  sa- 
vages strove  to  give  hindrance  to  the  army  of  Columbia; 

29  But  the  men  of  Columbia  let  two  of  the  destroying 
engines  loose  upon  them,  and  they  fled  into  the  wilder- 
ness like  wild  deer. 


l*tf  LATE 


CHAP.  XXXIIL 

Battle  of  the  Tha??ies — Gen.  Harrison  captures  the 
British  army  under  Gen  Proctor — illuminations  or 
account  of  it — news  of  it  received  in  England. 


JL 


-ND  it  came  to  pass,  oh  the  fifth  day  of  the  samp 
month,  that  Proctor,  with  the  savages  and  the  army  of 
trie  king,  rested  upon  advantageous  ground,  on  the 
banks  of  the  river  Thames, 

2  Where  he  drew  his  army  up  in  the  order  of  battle^ 
after  the  fashion  of  these  days,  and  prepared  himself  to 
meet  the  host  of  Columbia, 

3  Now  the  army  of  Proctor  was  mighty  ;  for  he  had 
a  thousand  horsemen :  but  the  number  of  the  savages 
that  followed  after  himareaot  known  to  this  time;  how- 
beit,  they  were  many. 

4  And  they  were  under  the  charge  of  a  chief  warrior*, 
whom  they  called  Tecumseh,  a  savage  whom  the  king 
Mad  made  a  chief  captain.* 

5  And  it  came  to  pass,  on  the  same  day,  in  the  latter 
part  of  the  day,  that  the  army  of  Harrison  drew  nigh 
unto  tr.e  place. 


•  Brig.    General 


WAR.  i  19 

6  And  he  called  together  his  captains  of  fifties,  and 
his  squadrons,  and  encouraged  them,  and  commanded 
them  to  prepare  themselves  for  the  fight. 

■f  And  he  put  the  host  of  Columbia  in  battle  array 
against  the  host  of  Britain,  army  against  army. 

£  Now  the  sound  of  the  trumpet,  the  cymbal,  the 
bugle-horn,  and  the  noisy  drum,  echoed  through  the 
deep  wilderness. 

■9  And  the  red  savages  appeared  in  the  field  before 
the  men  of  Britain,  for  they  had  put  them  as  a  shield,, 
in^he  front  of  the  battle. 

10  And  they  yelled  with  dreadful  yellings,  and  sound- 
ed aloud  the  war-whoop,  which  was  the  signal  of  death. 

11  But  the  army  of  Colombia  rushed  upon  them 
with  the  fierceness  of  lions. 

12  And  the  weapons  of  war  were  used  without  toet- 
cy  ;  the  foxes  and  the  beavers -crept  into  their  holes,  for 
the  destroying  engines  frightened  the  wild  beasts,  so 
that  they  looked  for  their  hiding  places. 

13  The  gallant  Johnson*  fell  upon  them  with  a 
band  of  chosen  horsemen,  and  he  drove  them  before 
him  like  chaff  before  the  wind,  and  smote  their  chief 
warrior,+  and  slew  him  with  his  own  hand,  so  that  he 
fell  to  the  earth. 

14  And  the  host  of  Columbia  assailed  the  men  of 
Britain  on  all  sides,  and  overcame  them,  and  made  them 
prisoners  of  war  ;  whereupon  the  engines  ceased  to  mt?r 
their  thunders. 


*   Col.  Johnson,  of  the  Kentucky  light-horse. 
t  Tecumsph  ;  toko  was  at  that  moment  in  the  act  of 
thfioting  the  colonel. 


120       .  LATE 

15  Howbeit,  Proctor  escaped,  on  a  swift  running 
horse,  with  a  handful  of  his  captains  that  were  under 
him. 

16  Now  the  number  of  prisoners  captured  by  the  ar- 
fiiy  of  Harrison  that  day  were  about  six  hundred. 

17  And  the  slain  and  wounded  of  the  men  of  Britain 
were  thirty  and  three ;  and  the  same  number  of  savages 
were  slain. 

18  Of  the  army  of  Columbia  seven  were  slain  and 
two  score  and  tw©  were  wounded. 

19  But  the  men  of  Kentucky  and  Ohio,  whose  sons 
and  brothers  and  fathers  had  been  inhumanly  slaughter- 
ed at  the  River  Raisin,  slew  not  a  single  captive. 

20  But  they  treated  them  as  men  ;  thus  rendering 
good  for  evil,  according  to  the  word  of  the  Lord. 

21  Moreover,  they  captured  six  of  the  destroying  en- 
gines that  were  made  of  brass,  and  two  that  were  made 
of  iron  ;  besides  many  weapons  of  war. 

22  Now  three  of  the  brass  engines  were  those  given 
to  the  men  of  Britain,  at  the  capture  of  Detroit,  the  first 
year  of  the  war,  and  were  the  same  that  had  been  taken 
from  the  king  in  the  days  of  Washington. 

23  Soon  after  the  battle,  Harrison  returned  with  his 
army  to  Detroit,  where  many  of  the  savages  had  assem- 
bled, to  repent  of  their  evils,  and  ask  for  mercy  from  the 
chief  captain. 

24  So  Harrison  made  a  covenant  with  them,  and 
they  were  thankful,  and  gave  him  hostages. 

25  Now  there  were  great  rejoicings  in  the  land  of 
"Columbia,  and  the  hearts  of  the  people  were  exceeding 
glad, 


■WAR.  121 

26  So -that  when  the  news  thereof  reached  them 
they  drank  wine  ;  and  when  the  evening  came  they 
lighted  their  candles,  and  put  them  in  candlesticks  of 
silver  and  candlesticks  of  gold,  and  placed  them  in  the 
windows  of  their  houses. 

27  And  there  were  many  thousands  of  them  ;  and  the 
light  thereof  was  as  though  the  stars  had  fallen  from 
heaven. 

28  This  did  they  throughout  the  land   of  Columbia, 
-from  the  district  of  Maine,  in  the  east,  to  the  state  of 

Georgia,  in  the  south. 

29  And,  when  the  Prince  Recent,  and  the  chief 
counsellors,  and  the  wise  men  of  Britain,  heard  the  ti- 
ding?, for  a  truth,  that  their  fleet  and  their  army  were 
captured,  they  were  astonished  beyond  measure. 

30  They  looked  at  one  another  like  men  who  had 
lost  their  wiis  :  they  were  sileat,  and  their  tongues 
clave  to  the  roof  of  their  mouths. 

31  Their  knees  smote  one  against  another.,  for  the 
strength  of  Britain  was  shaken ;  her  valiant  warriors 
had  lost  their  honour  ;*  and  her  glory  was  outshone. 

32  Now  there  was  great  honour  and  praise  bestowed 
upon  Harrison  for  his  courage,  and  his  valiant  acts  ;  and 
the  people  remembered  his  name  with  pleasure. 

33  Moreover,  he  gave  great  [raise  to  Shelby,  the 
governor,  and  ferry,  and  Johnson,  and  all  the  brave 
men  that  were  with  him. 


*  Doubly  lost  it:  by  water  and  by  land;  by  being- 
^■conquered rand  by  being  erne/. 
h  2 


122  LATE 

34  And  in  the  same  mowth,  when  the  object  of  the 
army  was  fulfilled,  the  husbandmen  of  Columbia  return- 
ed every  man  to  his  own  house. 

35  8ut  Harrison  and  Perry,  and  the  band  of  war- 
fiorsof  the  great  Sanhedrim,  went  into  their  vessels. 

36  And  they  moved  from  Detroit,  and  came  in  the 
ships  of  Perry,  to  Buffaloe,  nigh  unto  the  river  Niaga- 
ra, to  meet  Wilkinson,  who  came  from  the  south, 
and  was  appointed  chief  captain  of  the  army  of  the 
<sentre. 


WAK.  K§g 


CHAP.  XXXIV. 


Wax  with,  the  Creek  Nation  of  Indians — massacre  at 
Fort  Mimms — Georgia  and  Tennessee  militia,  under 
General  Jackson  retaliate. 


w< 


OW  it  came  to  pass,  while  these  things  were  going 
on  in  the  north,  and  the  repentant  savages  laid  their 
murderous  weapons  at  the  feet  of  Harrison, 

2  That  the  servants  of  the  king  were  stirring  up  the 
spirit  of  Satan  in  the  savages  of  the  wilderness  of  the 
south ; 

3  And  placing  the  destroying  engines  into  their  hands 
that  they  might  shed  the  blood  of  the  people  of  Colum? 
bia. 

4  Now  these  southern  barbarians  were  called  the 
Creek  nation  of  Indians. 

5  Moreover,  they  were  a  nation  of  savages  that 
dwelt  in  the  back-woods  and  the  wilderness  round  about 
the  states  of  Georgia,  Tennessee,  and  the  Mississippi 
Territory. 

6 " So }  about  this  .time,  they  took  their  weapons  'of 
death  in  their  hands,  and  went  against  the  strong  bold 
«f  Fcrt  Mimms,  which  lieth  on  a  branch  of  the  river 


124  LATE 

Mobile,  that   emptieth  its  waters  into  the  great  Gulf 
of  Mexico. 

7  And  they  captured  the  place  ;  and  with  the  fury  of 
demons  they  murdered,  with  the  tomahawk,  the  men, 
the  women,  and  the  infants  rhat  were  in  and  about  the 
fori,  sparing  neither  age  nor  sex  ;  and  slaying  the  prison- 
ers that  begged  for  mercy. 

8  And  the  number  of  the  people  cf  Columbia  that 
Were  massacred  and  burnt  alive  in  their  houses,  that  day, 
was  about  four  hundred ;  however,  there  were  an  hun- 
dred savages  slain. 

9  For  it  was  a  sore  fight ;  and  Beasly,  who  command- 
ed the  fort,  fought  hard  against  them  ;  howbeit,  he  was 

■dims. 

10  But  it  came  to  pass,  in  the  same  year,  that  the 
people  of  Columbia  were  revenged  of  the  evil ; 

.11  Andrew,  whose  sir-name  was  Jackson,  a  man  of 
courage  and  valor,  was  chief  captain  in  the  south  ; 

12  And  he  sent  out  one  of  his  brave  captains, 
whose  name  was  <  offee,  with  a  st.ong  band  ;  even  nine 
Jiu.ndred  mighty  hoi  semen  : 

13  Now  these  were  the  valiant  husbandmen  of  Geor- 
gia and  the  back-woods  of  Tennessee ;  their  horses  were 
fleet  as  the  roe-buck  ;  their  weapons  of  war  were  certain 
death. 

14  So  they  went  forth  against  a  town  of  the  savages 
called  Tallushatches,  on  the  second  day  of  the  eleventh 
month. 

15  And  on  the  next  day  they  encompassed  the  town 
roundabout;  and  the  savages  prepared  themselves  for 

;i:attle. 


WAR.  125 

16  About  the  rising  of  the  sun  they  sounded  their 
th-ums.  and  began  their  horrible  yellings. 

17  But  ihev  frightened  not  the  hearts  of  the  brave 
men  of  Tennessee. 

18  So  when  Coffee  had  stationed  his  captains  and  his 
men  of  war  about  the  town,  in  the  order  of  battle,  the 
whole  army  shouted  aloud  ; 

19  And  the  instruments  of  destruction  were  let  loose 
upon  them  on  all  sides  j  and  they  fought  with  all  their 
Kaight. 

'20  But  the  men  of  Columbia  rushed  upon  them,  and 
subdued  them,  and  made  about  four  score  women  and 
children  captive. 

21  And  slew  about  two  hundred  of  their  warriors  ^ 
leaving  not  a  man  to  tell  the  tidings. 

22  For,  lo  !  when  the  savages  of  the  wilderness  com- 
mit great  evils  and  transgressions  against  .the  people  of 
Columbia, 

23  The  great  Sanhedrim  of  the  people  send  out  migh- 
ty armies  against  them,  that  are  able  to  overthrow  them, 
and  make  their  towns  a  desolation,  and  lay  waste  their 
habitations. 

24  Now  the  loss  of  the  army  of  Columbia  that  day, 
was  five  slain  and  about  forty  wounded. 

25  And  Jackson,  the  chief  captain,  gave  great  praise 
to  Coffee,  and  all  the  valiant  men  that  fought  that  day, 

26  On  the  next  day  after  the  battle,  the  army  of  Co- 
lumbia returned  to  their  camp,  at  a  place  called  the  Ten~ 
Islands. 


%M  LATE 


CHAP.  XXXV. 

"Continuation  of  the  War  with  the  Creeks — Gen.  Jack' 
don's  great  victory  over  them — they  sue  for  peace — 
jt.  treaty  is  concluded  with  them. 


±\  OTWITHSTANDING  their  discomfiture,  the 
aation  of  the  Creeks  were  still  bent  on  warring  against 
the  people  of  Columbia. 

2  And  they  committed  many  outrages  upon  the  in- 
habitants of  the  states  round  about. 

3  But  it  came  to  pass,  on  the  seventh  day  of  the 
same  month,  that  a  messenger  came  to  Jackson,  the 
chief  captain,  and  spake  unto  him,  saying  : 

,4  Lo  !  even  now,  more  than  a  thousand  savages 
have  pitched  their  tents  at  Talledoga,  near  the  strong 
hold  of  Lashley,   with  intent  to  assail  it. 

5  Immediately  Jackson  took  two  thousand  hardy 
men,  who  were  called  volunteers,  because  they  had,  un- 
solicited, offered  their  sei  vices  to  their  country,  and  led 
them  against  the  savages. 

6  Now.  the  men  of  war  that  followed  after  him  were 
mostly  from  the  state  of  Tennessee,  and  men  of  daunt- 
less courage. 

7  So,  early  in  the  morning  .of  the  next  day,  the  army 
,of  Jackson  drew  nigh  the  place,  in  battle  array. 


WAR.  127' 

8"  And  the  savages  came  out  towards  the  army  of  Co- 
lumbia, with  shoutine  and  yellings  :   and  again  the  en 
gines-  of  destruction  were  used  plentifully. 

9  And  the  leaden  balls  whizzed  about  their  cars- 
like  unto  a  nest  of  hornets. 

10  But  the  horsemen,  and  the  whole  army  of  Jack- 
son, rushed  upon  the  savages,  and  slew  them  with  great 
slaughter,  and  overcame  them. 

1 1  And  the  number  of  savages  slain  that  day  was  a- 
bout  three  hundred ;  and  a  red- cross  banner  of  the 
Spanish   nation  was   found   amongst  them,  and  taken. 

12  Seventeen  of  the  men  of  Columbia,  were  slain  and 
about  four  score  wounded. 

13  So,  when  the  battle  was  over,  Jackson  returned  to 
his  own  camp. 

14  After  these  things  had  come  to  pass,  on  the  twelfth 
day  of  the  month,  a  certain  captain,  whose  sir-Dame 
was  White,  was  sent  against  another  place  called  the 
Hillabee-Towns. 

15  And,  on  the  eighteenth  day  of  the  same  month,  he 
took  the  towns,  and  destroyed  them,  and  slew  three 
score  of  the  savages,  and  made  about  two  hundred  two 
score  and  ten  prisoners. 

lG  About  eleven  days  afterwards,  a  valiant  captain, 
whose  name  was  Floyd,  with  his  brave  men,  went  a- 
gainst  the  towns  of  Autossee  and  Tallisee,  which  lie  on 
the  banks  of  the  river  Tallapoosie. 

17  And  Floyd  went  against  them  with  boldness  and 
triumphed  over  them  and  killed  about  two  hundred  of 
them,  and  burned  their  towns  with  fire,  and  slew  the 
king  of  Autossee,  and  the  king  of  Tallisee,  who  were  the 
kings  of  two  tribes. 


128  LATE 

1 8  Moreover,  on  the  thirteenth  day  of  the  next  month, 
Claiborne,  a  governor,  and  a  man  of  valor,  went  against 
the  savages  that  dwelt    on   the  river  Alabama. 

19  And  he  marched  with  his  army  through  the  wilder- 
ness more  than  an  hundred  miles,  to  a  town  built  opon  a 
place  called  by  the  savages  the  Holy-Ground,  where 
three  of  the  Indian  prophets  dwelt. 

20  Now  there  were  lying  prophets  among  the  savages, 
even  as  there  were  in  the  days  of  old,  among  the  children 
of  Israel ;  and  they  prophesied  according  to  their  own 
wishes ; 

21  And  those  of  shallow  understanding  believed  them, 
and  were  led  into  a  snare,  whereby  their  whole  tribe 
was  nigh  being  destroyed. 

22  And  Wetherford,  the  chief  warrior  of  the  Creek 
nation,  was  there  also  with  his  band. 

23  And  he  fought  hard  against  Claiborne;  but  he 
was"  overthrown,  and  fled,  and  the  town  was  burnt,  e- 
ven  two  hundred  houses. 

24  Notwithstanding  all  these  tribulations,  the  depre- 
dations of  the  savages  of  the  south  were  not  stayed. 

25  So  Jackson,  the  chief  captain,  v/ent  out  against 
them  with  his  army,  and  atta  eked  them  at  their  strong 
hold,  on  the  waters  of  the  Tallapcosie,  where  they  were 
entrenched,  with  more  than  a  thousand  warriors. 

26  Now  this  was  on  the  twenty  and  seventh  dav  of 
the  third  month,  in  the  one  th  ousand  eight  hundred  and 
fourteenth  year  of  the  christian  era. 

27  And  Jackson  set  his  destroying  engines  to  work, 
and  fought  de  sperately  against  them,  for  about  the  space 


Ma  j?  GErr?  AinDiairyr  Jacxso^t 


Jin  graver?  fir  Jfunt't  //rfvi'  r/Y/,r  Hi 


WAR,  129, 

of  five  hours ;  when  he  overcame  them,  so  that  only, 
about  a  score  escaped. 

28  Seven  hundred  and  fifty  of  the  savage  warriors 
were  found  slain  in  battle;  and  two  hundred  two  score 
and  ten  women  and  children  became  captives  to  the 
army  of  Columbia. 

29  Manahoee,  their  chief  prophet,  ^vas  smitten  in 
the  mouth,  and  slain,  and  two  other  false  prophets 
were  slain  with  him. 

SO  Moreover,  about  the  first  day  of  the  sixth  month, 
a  brave  man,  whose  name  was  Pearson,  with  the  hus- 
bandmen of  the  states  of  North  and  South  Carolina,, 
went  against  them  along  the  borders  of  the  Alabama,  and 
captured  about  six  hundred  of  them. 

Si  Thus  did  the  men  cf  Columbia  triumph  over 
them,  and  conquer  them,  even  to.  the  seventh  time. 

32  And  so  the  judgment  of  the  Lord  fell  upon  them- 
for  their  unrighteousness,  and  for  their  wicked  and  mur- 
derous deed's. 

33  After  which  they  repented  of  their  evil,  having, 
through  their  own  folly,  lost  many  thousand  warriors. 

34  And  their  chief  warriors  gave  up  their  instru= 
ments  of  destruction,  and  laid  them  at  the  feet  of 
Jackson,  the  chief  captain. 

35  Even  Wetberford,  the  chief  warrior,  gave  him* 
self  up  to  Jackson,  saying,  I  fought  tvith  my  might ;  but 
I  have  brought  evil  upon  my  nation ;  and  thou  hast^ 
slain  my  warriors  ;  and  I  myself  am  overcome 

36  Now  the  savages  are  easily  inflamed  and  roused  ta 
works  of  sin  and  death  ;  and  of  their  weakness  the  ser- 
vants   of  the  king  are  not  ashamed  to  take  advas^ 

M 


ISO  LATE 

tage  j  even  to  the  ruin  of  the    poor  and   ignorant   bar- 
barians. 

37  So  the  warriors  and  the  whole  nation  of  the 
Creeks,  being  tired  of  a  destructive  war,  entreated  the 
men  of  Columbia  for  peace,  saying  unto  Jackson, 

38  Lo  !  now  are  our  eyes  opened  to  our  own  profit  j 
now  will  we  make  peace  with  you. 

39  And  if  ye  will  no  more  suffer  the  fire,  and  the 
sword,  and  the  destroying  engines  to  spread  desolation 
amongst  us, 

40  Then  will  we  make  a  covenant  with  you,  and  give 
you  for  an  inheritance  a  great  part  of  the  land  which 
our  fathers  inherited  before  us. 

41  And  the  length  and  the  breadth  thereof  shall  be 
about  as  large  as  the  whole  island  of  Britain,  whose 
men  of  war  have  led  us  into  this  snare. 

42  For  although  the  king,  who  calleth  himself  our  fa- 
ther, across  the  great  waters,  did  put  the  instruments  of 
death  into  our  hands,  and  give  us  the  black  dust  in  abun- 
dance; nevertheless,  he  deceived  us ;  and  in  the  hour  of 
danger  his  servants  left  us  to  take  care  of  ourselves. 

43  So  Jackson  made  a  covenant  with  them  ;  and  it 
was  signed  by  the  chiefs  of  their  nation. 

44  And  after  it  had  been  examined  by  the  wise  men 
and  the  great  Sanhedrim  of  the  people,  it  was  ratified 
and  signed  with  the  hand-writing  of  James,  the  chief 
governor  of  Uie  land  of  Columbia. 


WAR,  lh 


CHAP.  XXXVf. 

Plan  of  attack  on  Montreal  defeated. 


HE  frailty  of  man  speaketh  volumes  ;  one  man  ac- 
cuseth  another  ;  but  where  is  he  who  is  perfect  ? 

2  Man  deviseth  mighty  plans  in  his  own  mind,  but 
he  accomplished  them  net. 

3  He  is  wise  in  his  own  conceit,  but  his  wisdotfl 
faileth  him  :  he  seeth  folly  in  others,  but  perceiveth  not 
his  own  ;  he  is  as  a  reed  shaken  with  the  wind. 

4  Now  the  country  of  Columbia  was  assailed  on  every 
side  by  the  enemies  of  freedom. 

5  And  in  the  hope  that  the  war  might  speedily  cease, 
and  an  end  be  made  of  the  shedding  of  blood,  the  great 
Sanhedrim  of  the  people  wished  to  push  their  armies 
into  the  heart  of  the  provinces  of  the  king,  even  te 
Montreal. 

6  So  they  pitched  upon  certain  chief  captains,  who 
were  well  skilled  in  the  arts  of  warfare  :  and  Wilkinson 
and  Hampton  were  the  names  of  the  captains ; 

7  And  Brown,  and  Boyd,  and  Covington,  and  Swift, 
and  Coles,  and  Purdy,  and  Ripley,  and  Swartwout, 
and  Fraser,  and  many  others,  were  valiant  captains  un- 
der them. 

8  Not  many  days  after  Harrison  returned  from  bis 
triumph  over    Proctor's  army ;   a»d  in  the  same  year, 


152  LATE 

it  came  to  pess,  that  Wilkinson  conveyed  his  army  frees 
Fort  George  and  the  country  of  Niagara,  to  Sackett?« 
Harbor,  at  the  east  end  of  lake  Ontario;  leaving  Har- 
rison and  M'Clure  behind,  at  the  strong  hold  of  Fort 
George. 

9  From  Sackett's  Harbor  Wilkinson  moved  to  a 
place  called  Grenadier  Island ;  and  in  the  first  week  of 
the  eleventh  month  he  arrived  at  Ogdensburgh,  in  order 
to  go  against  the  strong  hold  of  Montreal. 

10  Now  the  army  of  Hampton  rested  nigh  unto  lake 
Champlain;  and  about  the  same  time  he  moved  towards 
the  borders  of  the  king. 

11  And  Wilkinson    sent  a  messenger  to  him,  and  ea- 

' treated  him  to  come  and  meet  him,  and  join  the  two  aar- 
mies  at  the  village  of    St.  Regis. 

12  The  same  night  Wilkinson  with  his  army  crossed 
the  great  river  St.  Lawrence,  near  by  the  strong  hold 
of  Frescot,  which  lieth  in  the  dominions  of  the  king. 

13  And  he  moved  down  with  about  six  thousand  men 
towards  the  hold  of  Montreal,  until  he  came  to  a  place 
called  Crystler's  Farms,  nigh  unto  Williamsburgh. 

14  Now,  at  this  place,  on  the  eleventh  day  of  the 
eleventh  month,  a  strong  band  of  the  men  of  war  of 
Britain,  from  Kingston  and  round  about,  fell  upon  his 
army  in  the  rear,  and  annoyed  them  greatly. 

1 5  At  length,  on  the  same  day,  a  part  of  the  army 
of  Columbia  turned  about,  and  fought  against  them  and 
drove  them  back ;  however  it  was  a  sore  light. 

16  Wilkinson,  the  chief  captain,  who  went  before 
the  host  of  Columbia,  had  been  sick  many  days,  asd 
vms  unable  to  go  forth  against  them  himself. 


WAR.  133 

17' So  he  sent  some  of  his  brave  captains,  even 
Boyd,  and  Swartwout,  and  Covington;  and  the  en- 
gines of  destruction  were  set  to  work  with  great  noise 
and  fury ;  and  the  valiant  Covington  was  wounded  unto 
death. 

18  Moreover,  the  loss  of  the  men  of  Columbia  that 
day  was  an  hundred  slain,  and  two  hundred  two  score 
and  ten  wounded,  and  the  loss  of  the  king  was  about  an 
hundred  four  score  and  one. 

19  After  this  battle  the  army  of  Wilkinson  moved 
along  the  St.  Lawrence  until  they  came  to  Barnheart's^ 
near  Cornwall,  wheve  they  met  the  valiant  Brown. 

20  Now  this  place  lieth  on  the  north  side  of  the  river, 
and  on  the  other  side  lieth  St.  Regis,  where  Wilkinson, 
the  chief  captain,  expected  to  be  joined  by  the  army  of 
Hampton,  from  Champlain. 

21  But  in  this  he  was  disappointed  ;  for,  lo  !  Hamp- 
t  »n  sent  one  of  his  captains,  whose  name  was  Atkinson, 
to  Wilkinson,  with  the  tidings  that  he  had  declined  to 
meet  him,  and  was  returning  to  his  camp  on  the  lake. 

22  Now  when  the  army  of  Wilkinson  beard  those 
things,  they  were  discouraged;  and  all  the  plans  that 
had  been  devised  by  Armstrong,*  the  chief  captain, 
and  scribe  of  the  great  Sanhedrim,  were  of  no  avail. 

23  So  the  array  of  Wilkinson  crossed  the  river  again 
and  came  into  the  land  of  Columbia,  at  French  Mills, 
near  St.  Regis;  where  they  went  into  winter  quar- 
ters. 


*   Gen.  Armstrong,  Secretary  at    War, 
m    2 


434  LATE 

24  And  the  men  of  Columbia,  even  the  great  Sanhe- 
drim, were  disappointed  in  their  expectations. 

•  25  Moreover,  Hampton  received  much  blame  in  the 
thing ;  and  he  was  even  taxed  with  the  crime  of  drink 
ing  too  freely  of  the  strong  waters. 

26  But  the  imaginary  evils  which  the  children  of  men 
commit  are  oftentimes  graven  in  brass,  whilst  their  actuaS 
good  deeds  are  written  in  sand. 

27  Neither  shall  it  be  forgotten  here,  that,  when  the 
shivering  soldiers  of  Columbia  were  suffering  with  cold 
in  the  north, 

28  The  lovely  and  patriotic  daughters  of  Columbia, 
blest  with  tenderness,  remembered  them,  and  sent  them 
coverings  for  their  hands  and  their  feet : 

29  Even  from  the  fleece  of  their  fathers'  flocks,  they 
wrought  them  with  their  own  hands,  and  distributed 
them  with  a  good  heart. 

30  And,  for  their  kindness  and  humanity,  the  poor 
soldier  blessed  them,  and  their  virtues  were  extolled  by 
the  men  of  Columbia  throughout  the  land« 


•  WAR,  IBS 


CHAP.  XXXVIT. 

Newark    burnt — Fort     George    evacuated — Niagara 
frontier  laid  waste — Buffaloe  burnt. 


"AN  the  meantime,  however,  the  strong  vessels  of 
Chauncey  went  out  and  brought  Harrison,  aud  the 
romnant  of  his  army,  from  Fort  George  to  Sackett'i? 
Harbor,  to  protect  the  place. 

2  But  they  left  M'Clure  behind,  with  the  men  under 
him ;  being  for  the  most  part  husbandmen,  called  militia, 
and  volunteers. 

3  And  they  were  eager  to  be  led  on  to  the  battle ; 
but  the  term  for  which  their  services  were  engaged  hav- 
ing expired,  they  returned  every  man  to  his  own  house, 

4  Se  M'Clure,  the  chief  captain  of  the  fort,  called  a 
council  of  his  officers,  and  they  agreed  to  depart  to  the 
strong  hold  of  Niagara. 

5  And  they  took  their  destroying  engines  and  the 
fclack  dust,  and  the  bread  and  meat  of  the  army,  and 
carried  them  across  the  river. 

6  Likewise  they  put  a  lighted  match  to  the  black 
dust  in  the  fort,  and  it  was  rent  asunder  with  a  great 
■apise,  as  it  were  of  thunder  and  an  earthquake. 


130  LATE 

7  Moreover,  they  burnt  the  town  of  Newark,  before 
they  departed,  which  happened  on  the  tenth  day  of  the 
twelfth  month. 

8  Howbeit,  they  gave  the  inhabitants  time  to  save 
themselves,  before  they  put  the  burning  torch  to  their 
dwellings ;  nevertheless,  it  was  an  evil  thing,  and  pleased 
not  the  people  of  Columbia. 

9  1  he  men  of  Columbia  were  not  cruel,  and  thoy 
put  none  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  town   to  the  sword. 

10  After  this,  it  came  to  pass,  on  the  nineteenth 
day  of  the  same  month,  early  in  the  morning,  before  the 
dawning  of  the  day,  about  fifteen  hundred  of  the  savages 
and  soldiers  of  the  king  crossed  the  river,  and  went  a- 
gainst  Niagara. 

1 1  And  they  fell  unawares  upon  the  men  of  Columbia, 
while  they  were  yet  asleep  in  their  tents  ;  and  overcame 
them,  and  took  the  fort,  and  put  the  garrison  to  the 
sword ;  even  the  women  and  children  suffered  under  the 
savage  tomahawk. 

12  Now  the  people  of  Columbia,  who  were  massacred 
that  day,  were  about  two  hundred  two  score  and  ten. 

13  But  the  captain  of  the  hold,  whose  name  was 
Leonard,  was  charged  with  the  evil ;  for  he  had  left 
the  fort,  and  neglected  that  duty  which  should  ever  be 
the  pride  of  a  soldier. 

14  Nevertheless,  when  they  had  committed  all  this 
horrid  slaughter,  the  barbarians  were  not  fully  glutted 
with  murder ; 

15  So  they  went  against  the  little  villages  of  Lewis- 
town,  Manchester,  Youngstown,  and  Tuscarora,  and 
burnt  them  with  fire,  and  slew  the  poor  and  helpless 
that  dwelt  round  about  the  place. 


WAR.  137 

1$  After  whieh,  at  the  close  of  the  year,  they  went 
against  the  beautiful  village  of  Buftaloe,  and  burnt  it 
-also  j  and  made  it  a  ruin  and  a  desolation. 


133  .LATE 


CHAP.  XXXVIII. 


Cruise  of  the  V.   S.  frigate  Essex,   D.  Porter  com- 
mandex — Jier  defence  and  capture,  at  Valparaiso. 


OW  whilst  the  great  lakes  and  rivers  were  bound 
in  fetters  of  ice,  and  the  arms  of  Columbia  slumbered  in 
the  winter  camps  of  the  north  ; 

2  And  whilst  the  conquering  sword  of  Jackson 
spread  ruin  and  desolation  among  the  misguided  savages 
of  the  south ; 

3  Lo  !  new  scenes  of  warfare  appeared  upon  the  wa- 
ters of  the  great  deep. 

4  In  the  first  year  of  the  war  David,  whose  sir- 
name  was  Porter,  sailed  from  the  shores  of  Columbia 
towards  the  south,  that  he  might  capture  the  vessels  cf 
the  men  of  Britain. 

5  And  the  ship  which  he  commanded  was  one  of 
the  strong  vessels  of  Columbia,  called  the  Essex. 

6  Now  David  was  a  valiant  man,  and  he  had  con- 
trived a  plan  to  annoy  the  commerce  of  Britain  in  the 
waters  of  the  great  Pacific  Ocean. 

7  So,  in  process  of  time,  he  passed  around  the  fur- 
thermost part  of  the  land  of  Columbia,  which  is  called 
Cape  Horn,  and  lieth  far  to  the  south  ;  near  the  country 
of  Patagonia,  which  is  inhabited  b}'  the  barbarians,  and 
sailed  towards  the  haven  of  Valparaiso. 


WAR.  139 

From  whence,  leaving  Chili  t©  the  south,  he  mov- 
ed along  the  coast  of  Peru,  till  he  came  to  Lima,  where 
it  never  rains  : 

9  A  country  where  gold  and  silver  are  found  in 
abundance,  and  where  there  is  one  continual  summer, 
and  the  trees  blossom  throughout  the  year. 

10  Again,  he  prepared  his  vessels,  and  sailed  from 
Lima  towards  the  north,  until  he  fell  upon  the  islands  of 
Gallapagos  ;  called  the  enchanted  islands. 

11  Now  these  islands  lie  upon  the  west  side  of  the 
great  continent  of  Columbia,  under  a  meridian  sun,  be- 
neath the  girdle  of  the  world. 

12  Hereabouts  he  captured  a  multitude  of  the  mer- 
chant ships  of  Britain,  laden  with  rich  merchandize,  and 
silver  as.d  gold. 

13  And  he  fixed-a  score  of  the  destroying  engines 
into  one  of  the  ships  he  had  taken ;  and  made  her  a 
fighting  vessel,  and  called  her  Name  "Essex  Junior,  and 
a  man,  whose  name  was  Downs,  he  made  captain 
thereof. 

14  And  he  fell  upon  the  fishermen  of  Britain,  and 
captured  those  who  went  out  to  cau.Ii  the  mighty 
whales,  which  afford  oil  to  give  us  light  in  the  night 
time,  and  bones  to  shade  our  daughters  from  the  scorch- 
ing sun  of  the  noon-day.  , 

15  Moreover,  David  went  to  an  island  where  dwelt 
wild  savages,  and  established  himself,  so  that  he  could 
go  out  and  return,  whensoever  he  chose. 

16  And  when  he  departed  from  the  island,  which  he 
called  after  the  chief  governor  of  the  land  of  Columbia 


140  LATE 

in  those  days,*  he  left  some  of  his  men,  with  the  weapons 
of  war  to  defend  the  place. 

17  Now  David  was  a  grievous  thorn  in  the  side  of- 
Britain,  and  he  almost  destroyed  her  whole  commerce 

in  the  South  Seas  : 

18  Inasmuch  as  he  put  the  wise  men  of  the  king  to 

idieir  wits  end ;    for  they  were  unable  to  out-sail  him 
and  take  him  captive. 

19  So  they  sent  their  strong  ships- in  search  of  him, 
bv  two's,  over  the  whole  face  of  the  waters  of  the 
Southern  Ocean  ;  and  the  expense  thereof  would  have 
made  more  than  two  feasts  for  the  Prince  Begent,  wh& 
governed  England  in  the  name  of  his  father. 

20  However,  it  came  to  pass,  that  David  returned 
again  in  his  ship  to  the  haven  of  Valparaiso ;  and  the 
vessel,  called  the  Essex  Junior,  accompanied  him. 

21  Now  Downs,  who  commanded  her,  had  been  t© 
the  place  before,  and  conducted  die  prizes  of  David  there, 
and  brought  him  the  tidings  that  he  was  likely  to  be  en- 
snared upon  the  waters. 

22  So,  whilst  David  was  there,  on  the  twenty-eighth 
day  of  the  third  month,  in  the  eighteen  hundred  and 
fourteenth  year  of  the  Christian  era, 

23  He  looked  around,  and  behold  !  he  saw  two  of  the 
strong  ships  of  Britain  approaching,  for  the  purpose  of 
hemming  him  in ;  the  one  called  the  Phoebe,  and  the 
other  the  Cherub, 

24  But  his  heart  sank  not  within  him,  for  he  knew 
n@  cowardice ;  but,  with   the  wisdom  of  a  brave  maa, 

-  ■■ '        ■  ,i' 

*  Madison   Island. 


WAR.  141 

lie  strove  to  escape,  as  the  vessels  were  too  powerful  for 
him. 

23  But  the  winds  were  adverse,  and  blew  hard,  and 
prevented  thetacklings  of  his  ship  from  taking  effect : 

26  Nevertheless,  David  said  unto  the  captains  of 
the  king,  Come  singly,  and  not  like  cowards,  upon 
me  ;  then  shall  ye  receive  the  thunders  of  the  freemen 
of  Columbia  abundantly  ; 

27  And  her  fame  shall  not  suffer,  although  in  the  con- 
test ye  may  destroy  my  vessel  upon  the  face  of  the  wa- 
ters. 

28  But  Hillyar.  the  captain  of  the  king's  ship  called 
the  Phoebe,  was  afraid  lest  he  should  be  overcome. 

29  Now,  when  David  found  he  was  unable  to  make 
good  his  escape,  he  drew  nigh  the  land,  that  he  might 
be  protected  by  the  great  law  of  nations ;  for  it  was  a 
place  friendly  to  both  parties. 

30  But  in  this  he  was  deceived;  for  the  authorities 
of  Spain  trembled  at  the  nod  of  the  servants  of  Britain, 
in  whom  there  was  no  faith. 

31  So  both  vessels  came  upon  him,  like  ravenous 
wolves,  in  the  very  haven  of  Valparaiso  ;  thus  trans- 
gressjuo  the  law  of  nations,  and  committing  an  outrage 
which  hath  ftvv  examples  under  the  sun. 

32  And  th°y  set  their  engines  to  work  upon  the  Es= 
sex  with  all  their  might. 

33  Nevertheless,    David  fought   against    them  with 
desperation,  for  there   was  no  hope  left  for  him  to  es 
cape  ;  neither  did  he  expect  mercy. 

34  \m\  he  held  cm  for  more  than  the  space  of  two 
hours,  when  he  became  overpowered  ;  having  his  ship 
a  sinking  wreck,  covered  with  blcod,  and  on  fire ;  witl* 

N 


jfe-  LATE 

about  an  hundred  and  fifty  of  his  men  slain  and  maim 
ed: 

35  So,  after  David  had  fought  hard,  he  became  cap- 
tive to  the  ships  of  the  king ;  who  had  also  some  of 
then*  men  slain,  and  some  wounded. 

36  Moreover,  Hillyar  gave  him  praise  and  called 
him  a  man  of  courage ;  for  he  fought  against  two  strong 
•ships  of  Britain. 

37  And  David  made  a  covenant  with  Hillyar,  in 
which  the  Essex  Junior  was  given  unto  him  and  his 
men,  that  they  might  return  in  her  again  to  their  own 
country. 

38  And  it  came  to  pass,  in  the  seventh  month  of 
the  same  year  of  the  feattle,  David  arrived  in  the  city 
of  New- York ;  having  bejen  absent  about  two  years. 

39  Now  when  the  people  of  Columbia  beheld  the 
valiant  Porter,  they  were  rejoiced  with  exceeding  great 

oy  ;  inasmuch  as  they  unharnessed  the  horses  from  be- 
fore  his  chariot,  and  drew  him  through  the  city. 

40  And  they  made  a  sumptuous  feast  for  him,  and 
invited  a  multitude  of  guests  j  and  spent  the  day  in  gla-d- 
siess  and  mirth. 


WAR.  liS 


CHAP.  XXXIX. 

'  zplure  of  the  TJ.  S.  sloop  of  war  Frolic,  b$  the  Bri- 
tish frigate  Orpheus — capture  of  the  British  sloop 
of  war  L"  Epervicr,bp  the  Peacock.  Cant.  Warring- 
ton— capture  of  the  Reindeer,  by  the  Wasp,  Capt* 
Blukely — the  Avon  captured  and  sunk — U.  S.  ves* 
sels  Syren  and  Rattlesnake  captured — Admiral 
Cochrane  declares  the  whole  American  coast  ia  e. 
state  of  blockade. 


N« 


OW  it  happened  on  the  twenty-first  day  of  the 
fourth  month  of  the  eighteen  hundred  and  fourteenth 
year,  that  one  of  the  strong  ships  of  the  king,  called  the 
Orpheus ; 

2  Being  upon  the  waters  of  the  great  deep,  fell  in  with 
a  small  vessel  of  the  United  States,  called  the  Frolic, 
and  made  capture  thereof. 

3  However,  in  the  same  month,  not  many  days  after- 
wards, a  fighting  vessel  of  Columbia,  called  tire  Peacock," 
commanded  by  the  brave  Warrington,  met  one  of  th© 
vessels  of  the  king. 

4  Now  they  were  about  equal  in  force ;  and  the 
name  of  the  vessel  of  Britain  was  called  L'Epervier 
and  the  captain's  name  was  Wales. 

5  And  they  sat  the  engines  of  destruction  to  work, 
$nd  fought  with  great  fury  for  the  space  of  forty  minutes- 1 


144  LATE 

G  When  the  mariners  of  Columbia  overcame  the 
servants  of  the  king,  and  the  vessel  of  Britain  struck 
her  red-cross  to  the  ship  of  Warrington. 

7  And  there  were  slain  and  wounded  of  the  servants 
of  the  king  about  twenty  and  three;  but  there  were 
none  slain  of  the  people  of  Columbia. 

8  Moreover,  Warrington  gat  about  an  hundred 
and  twenty  thousand  pieces  of  silver,  that  were  in  the 
vessel. 

9  And  he  received  great  praise  throughout  the  land 
for  this  gallant  exploit. 

10  And  the  great  Sanhedrim  thanked  him  and  gave 
him  a  medal  of  gold. 

11  Likewise,  the  people  of  Savannah,  a  chief  town 
in  the  state  of  Georgia,  being  a  thousand  miles  to  the 
south  of  New-York,  honored  him  greatly. 

1-  For  he  had  brought  both  vessels  into  their  port; 
and  1  ere  were  much  rejoicings ;  and  a  rich  feast  was 
prepared  for  him  by  the  people. 

13  Moreover,  it  came  to  pass,  on  the  twenty-eighth 
day  of  the  sixth  month,  that  one  of  the  fighting  s  hips 
of  Columbia,  called  the  Wasp,  met  a  Vessel  of  the  ug, 
upon  the  ocean,  called  the  I-'eindeer;  after  one  oi  the 
swift  running  animals  of  Columbia, 

14  Now  the  W7asp  was  commanded  by  a  man  of 
courage,  whose  name  was  Blakely. 

15  And  a  dreadful  battle  began;  and  the  mischievous 
balls  of  destruction  showered  around  with  tremendous 
noise. 

16  Nevertheless,  Blakely  ran  down  upon  the  Rein- 
deer, and  in  about  twenty  minutes  he  captured  her. 

17  But  her  captain  was  slain,  and  she   was  as  it 


WAR.  143 

were  a  wreck  upon  the  waters;  so  Blakely  destroyed 
her. 

18  The  loss  of  the  king,  in  killed  and  wounded 
that  day,  was  about  seventy  and  five ;  and  five  of  the 
men  of  Columbia  were  slain,  and  about  a  score  maim- 
ed. 

19  And  the  friends  of  the  great  Sanhedrim  were 
pleased  with  the  valiant  acts  of   Blakely. 

20  Moreover,  on  the  twenty-seventh  day  of  the 
eighth  month;,  the  Wasp  captured  another  ship  of  the 
king,  called  the  Avon,  and  sunk  her  to  the  bottom  of 
the  great  deep. 

21  And  the  slain  and  wounded  of  the  Avon,  was 
two  score  and  two. 

22  Ilowbeit,  about  the  same  time,  the  Syren  and 
the  Rattlesnake*  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  king. 

23  About  this  time,  the  whole  land  of  Columbia  was 
ordered  to  be  hemmed  in  by  Cochrane,  a  servant  of 
■the  king,  and  a  chief  captain  of  the  navy  of  Britain. 

24  But  all  their  blockades  were  of  no  avail  j  for  the 
men  of   Columbia  escaped  and  outwitted  them. 


U.  S.  schooner  and  brig}  about  14  guns  each. 


K  2 


14C  LATE 


CHAP.   XL. 


Breaking  up  of  the  cantonment  at  French  Mills — 
affair  at  La-Cole-Mill— Major  Appling  captures 
two  hundred  British  seamen — Gen.  Brown  captures 
Fort  Erie — battle  of  Chippawa  plains. 


OW  it  came  to  pass,  in  the  second  month  of  the 
same  year  in  which  David  gat  home  to  the  United 
States, 

2  That  the  armies  of  the  north  began  to  be  in  motion, 
and  departed  from  the  place  called  French  Mills, 
where  they  were  encamped. 

3  And  a  part  thereof  moved  towards  Plattsburgh,  on 
lake  Champlain  ;  and  was  commanded  by  a  brave  man, 
whose  name  was  Macomb,  and  Wilkinson,  the  chief 
captain,  followed  after  them. 

4  But  the  other  part  of  the  host,  commanded  by 
Jacob,  whose  sir-name  was  Brown,  went  to  Sackett's 
Harbor;  and  from  thence  against  the  strong  hold  of 
Niagara. 

5  And  it  was  so,  that  when  Wilkinson  heard  that 
Jacob  had  gone  against  Niagara;  he  marshalled  out 
his  force,  and  went  against  a  place  in  the  province  of 
the  king,  called  La-Cole-Mill,  to  take  it. 

6  Nevertheless,  he  failed,  and  lost  man}'  men;  after 
which  the  command  of  the  army  was  given,  to  a  chief 
captain,  whose  name  was  Izard. 


WAR.  147 

*?  In  the  meanwhile  many  of  the  evils  of  warfare 
were  committed  on  and  about  the  waters  of  Ontario 
and  the  great  lake  Erie. 

8  And  a  gallant  captain,  whose  name  was  Appling.* 
took  about  two  hundred  of  the  mariners  of  the  royal 
navy  of  Britain,  at  a  place  called  Sandy-Creek,  by 
the  waters  of  lake  Ontario  :  being  in  the  same  month 
that  the  strong  hold  of  Oswego  was  taken  by  the  men 
of  Britain. 

9  Now  on  the  third  day  of  the  seventh  month,  it 
came  to  pass,  that  Jacob,  the  chief  captain  of  the  host 
of  Columbia,  on  the  borders  of  the  river  Niagara, 

10  Having- prepared  his  men  beforehand,  crossed 
the  river  and  captured  fort  Erie,  and  an  hundred  thirty 
and  seven  of  the  soldiers  of  the  king,  and  some  of  the 
destroying  engines  ; 

1 1  And  the  next  day  being  the  anniversary  of  the 
"independence  of  Columbia,  after  having  left  some  of 
the  men  of  war  to  defend  the  place, 

12  He  moved  with  his  host  towards  the  plains  of 
Chippawa,  where  they  rested  for  the  night. 

13  On  the  next  day  Jacob  ^assembled  his  captains  of 
fifties,  and  his  captains  of  hundreds,  and  spake  unto 
them,  saying, 

14  Lo  !  the  army  of  the  king  are  mighty  men  of 
valor,  and  their  numbers  are  great,  even  those  who 
fought   in     Spain,   under     the    banners   of    Welling- 


*  Major  Appling* 


I4S  LATE 

ton,*  the  chief  warrior  of  Britain ;  and  Riall,  the 
chief  captain  of  the  host,  is  a  man  of  great  experi- 
ence : 

15  Nevertheless,  be  not  disheartened;  but  let  us  be- 
ware that  we  be  not  ensnared. 

16  So  he  prepared  his  army  to  go  against  the  host 
•of  Britain,  in  battle  array ;  and  the  soldiers  of  Colum- 
bia shouted  for  the  battle. 

17  Now  the  army  of  Britain  rested  upon  the  plains 
of  Chipnawa,  and  were  ready  to  meet  the  army  of  Co- 
lumbia ;  they  shouted  aloud,  and  inflamed  their  blood 
with  the  strong  waters  of  Jamaica. 

18  And  they  put  fire  to  the  black  dust  of  the  de- 
stroying engines;  and  a  great  noise  issued  from  the 
mouths  thereof. 

19  Moreover,  they  vomited  fire  and  smoke  and 
brimstone  incessantly,  and  with  the  movements  of  the 
armies  the  dust  of  the  earth  arose  and  overshadowed 
the  field  of  slaughter. 

20  And  the  heavy  balls  of  iron  whistled  about-them 
in  abundance. 

21  However,  the  skill  of  Jacob,  and  his  brave  cap- 
tains, became  manifest,  and  they  drove  the  host  of  Bri- 
tain before  them, 

22  And  compelled  them  to  flee  to  their  strong  en- 
trenchments at  Fort  George  and  Fort  Niagara. 

23  And  the  field  of  battle  was  covered  with  the  slain 
and  the  maimed  ;   even  eight  hundred  men. 

24  And  the  slain  and  wounded  of  the  servants  of  the 
Heine'  were  about  five  hundred. 


*  Lord  Wellington, 


WAR.  t-49 

23  So  Jacob  and  his  army  gat  great  praise,  ana  a 
the  warriors  of  Columbia  that  fought  that  day  : 

26  Amongst  whom  were  the  volunteers  of  the 
states  of  New- York  and  Pennsylvania,  who  were  led 
on  by  the  gallant  Porter.* 

27  And  Ripley  was  there,  and  the  brave  Scott,  who 
went  out  and  fought  in  the  heat  of  the  battle. 


Gens.  Forier,  Ripley,   and  Scott 


LATE 

CHAR  XLL    ' 
Battle  of  BrkJ^ewater. 


OW  about  this  time  there  was  peace  among  the 
strong  powers  of  Europe ;  and  the  strength  of  Britain 
was  free  to  be  employed  against  the  people  of  Colum- 
bia. 

2  So  she  increased   her  navy  on  the  shores  of  Co 
iumbia,  and  strengthened  her  armies   in  Canada;   and 
.sent  skilful  men  to  conduct  them  and  to  fight  her  bat- 
tles : 

3  And,  in  her  spite,  she  emptied  out  the  vials  of  hey 
vengeance  upon  the  United  States. 

4  Notwithstanding,  it  came  to  pass,  on  the  twenty 
fifth  day  of  the  same  month, 

5  That  another  bloody  battle  was  fought  hard  by,  at 
a  place  called  Bridgewater,  from  whence  ye  might  be- 
hold the  stupendous  water-falls  of  Niagara. 

G  There  the  army  of  Britain  cams  out  against  Jacob, 
with  a  host  of  five  thousand  chosen  men, 

7  Now  the  numbers  of  the  host  of  Columbia  were 
less  than  the  host  of  the  king,  who  were  commanded  by 
two  chief  captains,  the  one  named  Drummond,*  and 
ihe  other  Riall ; 

*   Gen.    Drummond. 


WAR.  151 

8>  Nevertheless,  Jacob  went  out  against  them  and 
gave  them  battle  :  and  the  army  of  Columbia  shouted 
aloud  5  and  the  baitle  waxed  hot  beyond  measure. 

9  And  it  lasted  for  the  space  of  seven*  hours  ;  even 
until  the  midnight. 

10  The  huge  engines  of  destruction  roared  as  the 
loud  thunder,  and  the  blaze  thereof  was  like  unto  flash- 
es of  lightning. 

1 1  But  it  came  to  pass,  that  the  army  of  Columbia 
drove  the  invincibles  of  Wellington  from  the  field. 

12  The  valiant  Miller,  with  his  band,  rushed  upon 
the  soldiers  of  the  king,  with  the  sharp  points  of  his 
weapons  of  war,  that  faintly  glittered  in  the  light  of  the 
moon,  and  overcame  them.* 

13  Moreover,  Drummond,  the  chief  captain  of  the 
king,  was  wounded,  and  in  danger  of  being  made  cap- 
tive ;  and  Riall,  the  chief  captain,  was  taken  and  fell 
into  the  hands  of  the  brave  Jessup.f 

14  And  Jacob,  the  chief  captain  of  the  host  of  Co- 
lumbia, was  sorely  wounded  ;  and  the  brave  Scott  was 
wounded  also. 

15  However,  this  was  a  dreadful  battle,  fought  ar- 
my against  army,  and  blood  and  slaughter  covered  the 
green  fields. 

16  The  loss  of  the  king,  was  about  a  thousand  and 
two  hundred  fighting  men,  who  came  to  lose  in  the 
land  of  Columbia  the  honor  they  won  in  Europe. 

*  Miller's  brilliant  charge  on  the  enemy, 
t  Major  Je$sup,  of  the  25th  Reg, 


Ii2  LATE 

17  The  loss  of  the  men  of  Columbia  was  also  very 
great ;  being  an  hundred  three  score  and  ten  slain,  and 
more  than  five  hundred  maimed. 

18  Now,  as  Jacob,  the  chief  captain  of  the  host  of 
Columbia,  was  wounded,  the  charge  was  given  to  the 
valiant  Ripley,  and  the  army  returned  to  the  strong 
hold  of  Fort  Erie. 

19  And  Jacob  and  his  brave  men  gained  great  praise 
throughout  the  land  of  Columbia. 


WAR.  253 


CHAP.   XLII. 

Assault  on  Fort  Erie,  by  the  British,  under  Gen. 
Drummond — Gen.  Brown  resumes  his  command — 
sallies  out  of  Fort  Erie  against  the  British  camp 
— M* Arthur's  expedition  into  Canada. 


1  ja_ND  it  came  to  pass,  on  the  fourth  day  of  thf. 
next  month,  being  the  same  day  that  the  gallant  Mor- 
gan, with  two  hundred  and  two  score  men,  drove  a 
thousand  soldiers  of  the  king  from  before  Black   Rock, 

2  That  a  chief  captain  of  Columbia  whose  name 
was  Gaines,*  anived  from  Sackett's  Harbor  at  Fort 
Erie;  and  took  the  command  thereof. 

3  And  it  was  so,  that  on  the  following  day  the  army 
of  the  king  approached  towards  the  fort,  and  encamped 
themselves. 

4  Moreover,  they  threw  up  breast-works  and  pre- 
pared their  battering-rams,  with  intent  to  destroy  the 
place,  and  make  captives  of  the  men  of  Columbia. 

5  And  on  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  month,  after  they 
hud  prepared  themselves,  they  rushed  forth  with  all 
their  might  against  the  strong  hold  of  Columbia. 

6  And  as  their  deeds  were  evil,  they  began  in  the 
dead  of  the  night,  when  the  bowlings  of  the  wild  wolf 


*  Gen.  Gaines. 
O 


154  LATE 

are  heard  from  afar,  and  the  steady  roar  of  distant  wa- 
ter-falls, catches  the  ear  of  the  drowsy  centinel. 

7  Lo !  it  was  a  night  dark  and  gloomy ;  and  the 
very  clouds  of  heaven  wept  for  the  folly  of  man.* 

8  Quickly  did  the  weapons  of  murder  disturb  and 
trouble  the  general  silence. 

9  Their  thunders  roared  around  the  battlements ; 
and  the  sudden  blaze,  from  the  engines,  was  as  a  thou- 
sand flashes  of  lightning. 

1 0  But  the  men  of  Columbia  were  not  asleep ; 
for  they  met  them  at  the  onset :  thrice  the  men  of  Bi  i- 
tain  came;  and  thrice  were  they  driven  back. 

11  About  this  time,  a  man  of  Columbia,  who  was 
sorely  wounded,  begged  of  an  officer  of  the  king  that 
his  life  might  be  spared  ; 

12  But  the  captain,  whose  name  was  Drummond,t 
to  whom  he  spake,  refused  him  quarters;  and,  taking 
an  oath,  he  swore,  and  cursed  the  men  of  Columbia, 
saying,  Even  as  I   slay  thee,  so  shall  it  be  with  ye  all. 

13  Thus  violating  the  commandment  of  God.  which 
sayeth,  Thou  shalt  do  no  murder. 

14  But  the  hand  of  the  Lord  was  stretched  cut 
against  him ;  for  while  he  was  yet  speaking,  in  the 
wickedness  of  his  heart,  he  was  smitten  dead  to  the 
earth. 

15  Now,  although  the  men  of  Britain  did  some 
injury  to  the  fort,  they  were  quickly  compelled  to  de- 
part. 

*   It  teas  r  rainy  night. 

v  Col.  Di'Utiimt>nd. 


WAR.  155 

lu  And  the  slain  aad  wounded  of  the  king  that 
sight,  were  about  seven  hundred,  besides  two  hundred 
captives. 

17  The  loss  of  the  United  States  was  about  an 
hundred  men. 

18  Now  it  came  to  pass,  on  the  seventeenth  day  of 
the  next  month,  when  Jacob  was  recovered  of  his 
v  ounds,  a;vJ  had  resumed  his  command,  he  sallied  out 
of  Fort  Erie  with  his  men,  and  went  against  the  camp 
of  the  servants  of  the  king. 

19  And  by  his  bravery  and  skill,  and  that  of  the 
valiant  captains  under  him,  he  took  and  destroyed 
their  strong  holds,  and  slew  many  of  them,  so  that 
their  loss  was  about  a  thousand  fighting  men. 

20  And  the  slain  and  wounded  of  Jacob's  army 
were  two  hundred  ninety  and  nine. 

21  Now  tiie  valiant  deeds  of  Jacob,  and  his  brave 
men,  are  they  not  written  in  all  the  books  of  the  chroni- 
cles of  the  land  of  Columbia  of  that  day  ? 

22  After  this,  on  the  twenty-first  day  of  the  same 
month,  the  chief  captain,  and  the  host  of  Britain,  being 
tired  of  the  noise  of  the  destroying  engines  of  the  men 
of  Columbia,  went  away  from  the  place  and  rested  at 
Queenstown.i 

23  About  this  time  Izard,  the  chief  captain,  arriv- 
ed at  Fort  Erie,  from  Plattsburgh,  and,  as  he  was  the 
oldest  captain,  he  t  jok  the  charge  of  the  army  of  the 
north. 

24  Daring  these  circumstances,  it  happened  that  the 
brave  M' Arthur,  who  had  remained  at  the  strong  hold 
of  Detroit,  to  defend  it, 


156  KATE 

25  Moved  his  army  towards  Burlington  Heights, 
and  went  more  than  un  hundred  miles  into  the  province 
cf  Canada. 

26  And  the  men  of  Columbia  that  went  with  him 
were  valiant  men.  from  the  states  of  Kentucky  and  Ohio  ,; 
in  number  about  eight  hundred. 

27  Victory  perched  upon  their  arms,  and  they  slew 
some  of  the  servants  of  the  king,  and  made  many 
prisoners,  and  returned  again  with  the  loss  of  one  man. 

28  In  the  meanwhile,  the  army  of  Izard  crossed  the 
river  and  returned  from  Erie  to  the  borders  of  Columbia, 
in  the  latter  part  of  the  year,  and  went  into  their  winter 
«»mps  at  Buffalo. 


WAR.  157 


CHAP.  XLIII. 


Attack  on  Stonington,  by  the  British  ships  of  war 
which  art  defeated  and  driven  of. 


•N  these  days  the  strong  powers  of  Britain  strove 
hard  to  quench  the  fire  of  Columbian    Liberty, 

2  But  it  was  lighted  up  by  the  hand  of  heaven,  and 
not  to  be  extinguished. 

o  Now  it  came  to  pass,  on  the  ninth  day  of  the  eighth 
month  of  the  same  year, 

4  That  the  niighty  ships  of  Britain  came  and  opened 
their  thundering  engines  upon  the  little  town  of  Ston- 
ingtoa,  which  lieth  in  the  slate  of  Connecticut,  in  the 
east. 

5  But  the  inhabitants  of  the  place  were  bold  and 
valiant  men,  and  they  scorned  to  make  a  covenant  with 
the  servants  of  the  king. 

G  Although  Hardy,*  the  chief  captain  of  the  king's 
ships  had  threatened  to  destroy  the  place ;  saying,  Re- 
move from  the  town  your  women  and  your  children, 
who  are  innocent  and  fight  not. 

7  Thus  shewing  more  righteousness  than  any  of  the 


*  Coto    TT>-hf,  a  cavtam  undei  Lord  Nelson,  at 
the  battle  nf  Trafalgar. 


153  LATE 

kingV'captains :  albeit,  he  gave  them  only  the  space  oi 
one  hour  to  depart : 

S  So  the  men  of  Columbia  let  the  destroying  engines 
loose  upon  the  vessels,  and  shot  the  yankee  balls  amongst 
them  plentifully,  and  compelled  them  to  depart : 

9  Notwithstanding,  they  had  but  two  of  the  destroy- 
ing engines  in  the  place. 

10  However,  on  the  eleventh  day  of  the  same  month, 
they  were  again  forced  to  put  them  in  motion. 

1 1  For,  in  the  meantime,  Hardy  had  sent  a  messen- 
ger to  the  inhabitants,  saying, 

12  If  ye  will  not  prove  wicked,  and  will  refrain  from 
sending  your  evil  torpedoes  amongst  our  vessels,  then 
will  we  spare  your  town. 

13  Now  Hardy  was  mightily  afraid  of  these  torpe- 
does, (the  history  whereof  is  written  in  the  fiftieth 
book  of  these  chronicles)  and  he  trembled  at  the  sound 
of  the  name  thereof. 

14  Nevertheless,  the  people  of  Stonington  refused 
his  request. 

15  So  the  ships  of  Britain  came  again  and  they 
brought  another  strong  ship  of  the  king  to  help  them  to 
take  the  place. 

lG  But  once  more  the  valiant  sons  of  Connecticut 
made  them  fly  for  safety  :  and  they  came  not  again. 

17  And  the  gallant  conduct  of  the  people  of  Ston- 
ington gained  them  much  praise,  even  from  the  great 
Sanhedrim  of  the  people. 

18  Thus  would  the  men  of  Columbia  have  done,  in. 
many  other  places,  but  for  the  false  words  and  wicked- 
ness of  traitorous  men. 


WAR.  159 


CflAP.   XLIV. 


Affairs  in  the    Chesapeake — British  army  move  up 

the  Patuxent — land  and  march  towards  the    city 

of    Washington — prepare  themselves  for  battle  at 
Bladensburgh. 


N, 


OW  the  mighty  fleet  of  Britain,  that  troubled  the 
waters  of  the  great  Bay  of  Chesapeake,  commanded  by 
Cockburn  the  wicked,  continued  their  depredations. 

2  The  number  of  their  lighting  ships  were  increas- 
ed, and  the  soldiers  of  the  king  had  come  thither  in 
multitudes  from  the  island  of  Britain. 

3  For  the  war  which  she  had  waged  against  the 
mighty  ruler  of  France,*  was  at  an  end  ;  and  all  their 
men  of  war  were  idle  ;  so  they  sent  them  against  the 
men  of  Columbia,  who  slew  them  with  terrible  slaugh- 
ter. 

4  Now  the  numbers  of  the  servants  and  soldiers  of 
the  king,  in  and  about  the  Chesapeake,  were  little  fewer 
than  ten  thousand. 

5  And  they  moved  up  the  great  river,  which  is  called 
the  Potowmac,  and  the  river  Patuxent,  which  lieth  to 
the  east  thereof. 

6  So,  as  they  passed  along,  they  did  much  damage^ 


*  Buonaparte. 


16:  LA' 


CHAP.    XLV< 

Oajteurz  of  Wa&Mngton — Sucking  of  Alexandria— 
death  of  Sir  Peter  Parker. 


N. 


X ™  OW,  when  Ross,  the  chief  captain,  had  done 
speaking,  they  sent  forth  their  fire  brands,  and  sat  their 
destroying  engines  to  work,  and  cast  balls  of  destruc- 
tion and  death. 

2  Nevertheless,  the  men  of  Columbia  were  not  dis- 
mayed, but  poured  out  their  thunders  upon  them  in 
abundance. 

3  And  Joshua,  sir-named  Barney,  who  commanded 
the  vessels  of  Columbia  near  the  place,  with  bis  brave 
men,  went  out  upon  the  land,  and  fought  against  them 
with  desperation. 

4  Tor  he  had  ordered  his  little  fleet  to  be  burnt  with 
fwc}  that  the  men  of  Britain  might  not  profit  thereby, 
and  it  blew  up  in  the  air  with  a  loud  noise. 

5  Now  Joshua  was  in  the  heat  of  the  battle ;  and  his 
destroying  engines  slew  the  men  of  Britain  on  all  sides  : 
however,  he  was  wounded  and  made  captive. 

6  llu!  the  servants  of  the  king  treated  Joshua  well, 
and  honoured  him  for  his  bravery. 

7  Now  James,  the  chief  governor,  and  the  courisel- 
|pis,  and  the  strikes  of  the  great  Sanhedrim,  went  out 


war.  i  m 

to  see  the  battle,  and  to  contrive  for  the  safety  of  the 
city. 

S  And  Munroe,*  the  chief  scribe  of  the  great 
Sanhedrim,  was  there ;  and  Armstrong,!  and  many 
other  friends  of  the  land  of  Columbia. 

9  Nevertheless,  the  wisdom  of  all  their  plans  failed 
them  ;  and  they  were  sorely  grieved  to  behold  the  hus- 
bandmen and  the  army  of  Winder,  the  chief  captain, 
flee  before  the  host  of  Britain. 

10  But  they  were  misled  in  their  calculations ;  and 
they  were  now  unable  to  prevent  the  evil. 

IX  Neither  did  the  men  of  war  they  counted  upon 
arrive  in  time  to  catch  the  army  of  the  king. 

12  Therefore,  the  host  of  Columbia  fled,  and  went 
beyond  the  city,  and  passing  through  Georgetown, 
rested  at  a  place  called  Montgomery  Court-house. 

13  And  the  slain  and  maimed  of  the  king,  were 
about  four  hundred :  those  of  the  men  of  Columbia 
about  two  score. 

14  Now  it  was  about  the  going  down  of  the  snn, 
when  the  host  of  the  king  polluted  the  Citadel  of  Free- 
dom, and  with  their  unhallowed  footsteps  violated  the 
Temple  of  Liberty. 

15  And  Cockburn  and  Ross  Jed  the  savage  band  of 
Britain  into  the  midst  of  the  city. 

lo  And  the  men  of  Columbia  gnashed  their  teeth.  ^  i 

/si 
the 

*   Hon,  James  Munroe,  then  Sccry  of  StatHi 
t  Gen    Armstrong. 


*:<:  LA- 


CHAP.    XLV* 

Capture  of  WasJiiiigton — Sacking  of  Alexandria — 
death  of  Sir  Peter  Parker. 


OW,  when  Ross,  the  chief  captain,  had  done 
speaking,  they  sent  forth  their  fire  brands,  and  sat  their 
destroying  engines  to  work,  and  cast  balls  of  destruc- 
tion and  death. 

2  Nevertheless,  the  men  of  Columbia  were  not  dis- 
mayed, but  poured  out  their  thunders  upon  them  in 
abundance. 

3  And  Joshua,  sir-named  Barney,  who  commanded 
the  vessels  of  Columbia  near  the  place,  with  his  brave 
men,  went  out  upon  the  land,  and  fought  against  them 
with  desperation. 

4  For  he  had  ordered  Ids  little  fleet  to  be  burnt  with 
fire,  that  the  men  of  Britain  might  not  profit  thereby, 
and  it  blew  up  in  the  air  with  a  loud  noise. 

5  Now  Joshua  was  in  the  heat  of  the  battle ;  and  his 
destroying  engines  slew  the  men  of  Britain  on  ah  sides  : 
however,  lie  was  wounded  and  made  captive. 

6  B'ul  the  servants  of  the  king  treated  Joshua  well, 
and  honoured  him  for  his  bravery. 

f  Now  James,  the  chief  governor,  and  the  courisel- 
lois,  and  the  scribes  of  the  great  Sanhedrim,  went  out 


WAR.  ;  & 

to  see  the  battle,  and  to  contrive  lor  the  safety  of  the 
city. 

8  And  Mimroe,*  the  chief  scribe  of  the  great 
Sanhedrim,  was  there ;  and  Armstrong,!  and  many 
other  friends  of  the  land  of  Columbia. 

9  Nevertheless,  the  wisdom  of  all  their  plans  failed 
them  ;  and  they  were  sorely  grieved  to  behold  the.hus- 
bandmen  and  the  army  of  Winder,  the  chief  captain, 
flee  before  the  host  of  Britain. 

10  But  they  were  misled  in  their  calculations ;  and 
they  were  now  unable  to  prevent  the  evil. 

H  Neither  did  the  men  of  war  they  counted  upon 
arrive  in  time  to  catch  the  army  of  the  king. 

12  Therefore,  the  host  of  Columbia  fled,  and  went 
beyond  the  city,  and  passing  through  Georgetown, 
rested  at  a  place  called  Montgomery  Court-house. 

13  And  the  sjain  and  maimed  of  the  king,  were 
about  four  hundred :  those  of  the  men  of  Columbia 
about  two  score. 

14  Now  it  was  abGut  the  going  down  of  the  son, 
when  the  host  of  the  king  polluted  the  Citadel  of  Free- 
dom, and  with  their  unhallowed  footsteps  violated  the 
Temple  of  Liberty. 

15  And  Cockburn  and  Ross  led  the  savage  baud  of 
Britain  into  the  midst  of  the  city. 

Io  An  J  the  men  of  Columbia  gnashed  their  teeth,  n  &~ 

ysf 
the 


*  II  m.  James  Munroe.  then  Sec'ry  of  State) 
t  Gen    Armstrong. 


1.&)  LATE 

bit  their  lips  with   vexation;  for  the  thing 'might  have 
been  prevented.* 

1 7  Nevertheless,  it  proved  a  blessing ;  for  it  united 
the  people  of  Columbia  as  one  man,  against  the  tyrants 
of  the  earth. 

1 8  Now  the  place  that  had  been  pitched  upon  to 
build  the  chief  city,  was- in  a  fine  country,  and  a  beau- 
tiful spot,  in  the  District  of  Columbia. 

19  But  the  inhabitants  round  about  the  City  of 
Washington  were  few;  for  they  had,  as  it  were,  just 
>  ;gan  to  build  it. 

20  There  was  much  ground  laid  out  for  the  city, 
bui  the  buildings  therein  were  not  many  ;  neither  was 
it  foitified. 


*   Wliatever  may  be  individual  sentiment,  it  has  been, 
and  still  is  the  opinion  of  the  best  informed,  that  there 
teas  sufficient   time  to   have  had  the  place  entrenched 
and  fortified,  if  necessary,   with  an  hundred  pieces  of 
cannon;  end  at  least  to  have  kept  the  enemy  at  bay, 
until  a  sufficient  force  were  assembled  to  have  cut  off 
his  retreat.     But  to  expect  raw  militia  to  meet  and  re- 
pulse, in  an  open  plain,  solid  columns  of  regular  troops, 
superior  in  numbers  as   well  as   discipline,   must    be 
preposterous.      Who  is  to  blame  in  the  business  we  pre- 
ume  not  to  say ;  but   hope   a  recurrence  of  the  evil 
yiy  be  provided  against  in  future.     Had  the  s<tme  en- 
i/ and  industry  been  exercised  at  the  city  of  If'ash- 
Lon,  that  were  displayed  by  the  patriotic  citizens  of 
rnb-York)  in  erecting  fortifications  for  the  dffence  of 
cir  capital,  we  might  have  been  spared  the  >nortifi~ 
[ition  that  followed  the  capture  of  the  scat  (f  govem- 
ent. 


WAR:  165 

21  Sir  when  the  servants  of  the  king  came  to  the 
place,  they  looked  around,  in  surprise,  and  cried  out' 
with  astonishment,  saying, 

22  Lo  !  the  city  hath  fled  with  the  people,  for  there 
arc  but  an  handful  of  houses  in  the  place. 

23  However,  the  next  day  they  began  the  work  of 
destruction,  like  unto  the  barbarians  of  ancient  times  ; 
for  their  wickedness  followed  after  them  as  the  shadow 
followeth  after  the  substance. 

24  And  they  destroyed  the  beautiful  edifices  with  fire, 
even  the  palace  of  the  great  Sanhedrim. 

25  Now  Cockburn  was  loath  that  his  wicked  deeds 
should!  be  handed  down  to  future  generations  ;  so  he- 
went  and  destroyed,  with  his  own  hands,  the  chie* 
printing-office*  of  the  city,  and  scattered  the  type*. 
abroad ; 

26  Because,  as  he  alledged,  the  printer  had,  in  timea 
past,  uttered  many  hard  things  against  him. 

27  Thus  did  he,  even  Cockburn,  like  an  ignorant 
savaje,  stamp  Ins  own  name  with  infamy,  and  make  it 
become  a  reproach  amongst  all  mankind. 

28  Science  and  learning  blushed  at  the  champions 
of  England,  who  had  been  represented  as  the  bulwark 
of  religion;  but  who  were,  in  reality,  the  supporters  of 
idolatry ;  the  staff  of  Juggernaut,  the  false  god  of  In- 
dia. 

29  Now  the  art  of  printing  was  not  known  among 
the  ancients ;  for  it  was  invented  in  these  latter  days  ^ 
even  in  the  fourteen  hundred  and  fortieth  year  of  the 
Christian  era. 


Office  of  the  National  Intelligencer, 


jfS6      '  I»AT£ 

30  It  was  the  helpmate  of  Freedom,  and  when  die 
Tight  which  it  spread  burst  forth  upon  the  world,  it  be-> 
gan  to  open  the  eyes  of  man,  and  to  destroy  the  poison- 
ous weeds  that  choaked  the  growth  of  Liberty. 

31  Moreover,  to  complete  the  vandalism  of  Cock-< 
burn  and  Ross,  they  fell  upon  the  printed  books  of  the 
great  Sanhedrim. 

-  3*2  Even  those  that  had  been  gathered  together  for 
instruction  ;  the  toil  of  many  years ;  containing  the 
learning  and  wisdom  of  ages. 

33  And  they  consumed  them  with  fire  ;  thus  striving- 
"*>  torn  man  back  to  the  ages  of  ignorance  and  dark- 
ness; 

34  Now,  Thomas,  whose  sir-name  wa3  Jefferson, 
who  had  been  a  scribe  in  the  days  of  Washington, 
and  a  chief  governor  in  the  land  of  Columbia,  in  times- 
past-;  araanvwhom  the  people  esteemed  for  his  vir- 
tue ; 

35  Wherr  he  heard  of  their   wickedness  ;   how,   sa-~ 
SFage-like,  they  had  burnt   the  books,  which  had  been 
written  by  the  wise  men  of  the  earth,  and  preserved 
&om  the  beginning  to  that  day  ; 

36  In  the  goodness  of  his  heart,  he  wrote  unto  the- 
great  Sanhedrim,  when  they  were  assembled  together, 
saying : 

37  Since,  like  the  barbarians  of  old,  whose  ignoj 
rasee  might  plead  for  them,  the  servants  of  the  king- 
dom of  Great  Britain  have  laid  waste  your  chief  city, 
and  made  it  a  desolation, 

36  And  have  trampled  upon  science,  mutilated  the 
monuments  of  art  and  industry,  destroyed  the  archives 
of  your  natron^  and  burnt  your  books- with  fire ; 


-WAR.  157 

-39  For  yotrr  benefit,  and  for  tie  benefit  of  my  coun- 
try, I  will  give  unto  you  my  whole  Library,    which  £ 

Jiave  selected  with  care,  from  my  youth  upwards  ;  and 
whatever  in  your  judgment  shall  be  the  value  thereof, 

-that  win  I  accept.* 

40  I  am  well  stricken  in, years,  and  must  shortly 
sleep  with  my  fathers ;  but  the  last  wish  of  my  heart 

.  shall  be  the  welfare  op  my  country. 

41  Now  Thomas  was  a  Philosopher,  and  a  man  of 
great  learning,  and  he  had  abundance  of  books  of  all 

-nations,  and  in  all  languages,  even  ten  thousand  vo- 
lumes. 

42  So  die  great  Sanhedrim  accepted  the  offer  o^ 
Thomas,  and  they  retain  the  books  to  this  day. 

43  Now  it  came  to  pass,  in  the  evening  of  the 
same  day,   on  which  the  vandals  of  Britain  set  fire  to 

'  the  city,  that  the  army  of  the  king  fled  from  the  place  ; 
for  the  air  of  Liberty  is  poison  to  the  followers  of  ty- 
rants. 

44  Moreover,  the}'   left  some    of    their   slain  and 
,  wounded  behind,  for  they  were  afraid  of  being  caugk„ 

in  a  snare  by  the  husbandmen  of  Columbia. 

45  So  they  went  down  to  the  river  and  gat  into  their 
vessels  from  whence  they  came. 

46  In  the  meantime,  the  inhabitants  of  Alexandria, 
•a  town  which  lieth  to  the  south  of  the  chief  city,  on  the 

-river  Potowmac,  in  the  state  of  Virginia, 


*  Mr.  Jefferson  left  it  to  Congress  to  pioJce  him  tehf 
compensation  they  thought  proper  for  his  Library- 


108  LATE 

47  Being  smitten  with  fear,  sent  to  Cock'burn  and 
Ross,  entreating  that  they  might  be  spared,   if,    pen-.I- 

'■  venture,  they  made  a  covenant  in  good  faith  with  them, 
and  surrendered  themselves. 

48  And  the  chief  captains  of  Britain  agreed  to  the 
capitulation  of  the  town,  and  to  vouchsafe  its  protec- 
tion. 

49  But  the  people  suffered  for  their  foolish  confi- 
dence ;  and   no  one  pitied  them  ;   for  it  was  of  their 

'  own  seeking. 

50  So  it  happened,  after  they  had  trusted  to  the 
faith  of  the  servants  of  the  king;  Gordon,  a  captain 
of  the  ships  in  the  river  Potowmac,  came  up  against 

Mill  cm  before  the  town  5 

51  And  took  their  merchant  ships ;  and  compelled 
the  people  to  open  their  store-houses,  and  put  into  the 

».V*3Jcls  their  flour,  even  sixteen  thousand  barrels,  and 
their  wine:  and  their  cotton,  and  a  thousand  hogsheads 
of  the  sweet-scented  plant. 

52  So  the  robbers  of  the  king  took  them  away,  sack- 
ed the  town,  and  laughed  at  the  people  thereof,  for 
trusting  to  the  faith  of  British  honour. 

i  53  However,  as  they  passed  along  down  the  rivtr, 
-.vuh  their  ill-gotten  treasure,  lo !  the  ships  of  Britain 
were  assailed,  and  nigh  being  destroyed  : 

54  For  Rogers,  and  Perry,  and  Porter,  three  va- 
liant captains  of  the  navy  of  Columbia,  gave  them 
hindrance  and  annoyed  them  greatly: 

55  Perry  and  Porter  raised  fortifications  upon  the 
borders  «f   the  river,  ..and  put  therein  the  destroying 


WAR.  169 

engines,  which ,  when  the  vessels  came  nigh  by, 
they  let  loose  upon  them  abundantly,  and  wounded 
them  in  their  tackling,  and  slew  numbers  of  their 
men. 

56  Moreover,  the  balls  which  the  engines  vomited 
forth,  were  red  and  hot  from  the.  mouth  of  the  fiery 
furnace. 

57  Meanwhile,  Rogers  sent  his  fire-ships  among 
them  to  destroy  them  as  they  fled;  nevertheless  they 
escaped. 

58  Now  about  this  time,   being  the  thirtieth  day  of 
-the  same  month,   Peter,  whose   sir-name  was   Parker, 

who  commanded  a  strong  ship  of  the  king,  was  com- 
mitting many  depredations  along  the  shores  of  the  Ches- 
apeake ; 

59  So  Peter  essayed  to  go,  in  the  night-time,  sgainst 
some  of  the  husbandmen  of  Columbia,  commanded  by 
.the  gallant  Reid,*  about  the  borders  of  the  state  of  Ma- 
ryland ; 

60  And  when  he  had  landed  his  men  of  war,  he 
went  out  after  the  husbandmen,  and  the  plunder  ;  but 
they  were  upon  the  watch,  and  fell  upon  him,  and  killed 
and  maimed  about  two  score,  and  were  nigh  mak- 
ing captives  of  them  all ;  and  Peter  was  amongst  the 
slain. 

61  Now  when  the  news  of  thetaking  of  the  chief 
city  of    Columbia,  and  the  sacking  of  Alexandria  was 


*  Cff?  Reid,  of  the  militia. 

J    2 


170  LATE 

received  in  Britain,  at  first  the  people  rejoiced,  saying, 
'Now,  forsooth,  have  we  conquered  these  cunning  Yan- 
kees! 

62  But  afterwards  they  became  ashamed,  and  hid 
their  faces ;  for   they   had   heard  the  judgment  of  the 
-^surrounding   nations,  by    whom  their  vandalism  was 
condemned.* 


•  A  number  of  well  written  articles  were  publish 
sd}  not  only  in  the  papers  of  France  and  Germany ', 
ibut  even  in  England,  in  which  this  scandalous  imita- 
tion of  the  conduct  of  the  Goths  and   Sandals  was  very 
severely  reprehended. 


WAR.  m 


CHAP.   XLV1. 

^-British  wider  Gen.  Prevost,  go  against  PlattsfatrgK 
— Com.  Macdonough  captures  the  British  squadron 
on  Lake  Champlain 


Jl\  EVERTHELESS,  if  difficulties  and  disasters 
befel  the  people  of  Columbia  in  the  south,  lo!  there 
was  a  wreath  of  laurels  weaving  for  them  in  the  north. 

2  Behold  !  a  mighty  army  of  the  king  had  assem- 
bled together  at  the  village  of  Champlain,  between 
Plattsburgb  and  Montreal  ;  nigh  unto  the  place 
where  Forsyth  the  warrior,  the  second  Sumter,*  was 
slain  ; 

3  For  the  Prince  Regent  had  commanded  his  ser- 
vants to  go  forth  into  the  heart  of  the  land  of  Coium- 


*  Sumter,  a  brave  officer  in  the  American  Revolu- 
tion, similar  in  character  to  Forsyth. 

The  folloioing  lines  were  suggested  to  the  mind  of 
the  writer,  by  viewing  Hip  spot  where  the  remains,  of 
the  gallant  Forsyth  lie  interred.  On  the  28th  of  June, 
1814,  this  enterprising  officer  made  an  incursion  into 
Canada  as  far  is  Odiestown,  where  an  affair  took 
place  with  a  detachment  of  the  enemy  from  the  Port 
of  La  Cole.  After  killing  seventeen  of  their  number ; 
Forsyth  recieved  a  wound-  in  the  neckofwhichf  ke  disd 


172  LATE 

bja,  and  separate  the  states  of  the  east  from  the  rest  of 
the  country. 

4 -So  it  came  to  pass,  about  the  fifth  day  of  the 
ninth  month,  that  the  host  of  Britain  appeared  before 
the  village  of  Pittsburgh  ;  which  lieth  about  three 
hundred  miles  from  New- York,  towards  the  north. 

5  Now  Prevost,  the  governor  of  Canada,  was  the 
eommander  of  the  army  ;  and  the  number  of  his  men 
of  war  tvas  about  fifteen  thousand. 

6  And  they  began  to  prepare  their  battering  rams, 
their  bombs,  and  their  rockets,  and  all  kinds  of  instru- 
ments of  destruction ;  and  they  entrenched  themselves 
round  about. 

7  Now  the  strong  hold  of  Plattsburgh  was  hard 
by  ;  and  the   barve  Macomb   was  the   chief  captain  of 


in  a  few  days  after,  and  was  buried,  tviih  military  ho^ 
,%ors,  at  Chumplain. 

Stop,  traveller,  stay — view  well  the  ground 

Where  Forsyth  fought  and  bled  ; 
Mark  well  the  spot,  for  yonder  mound. 
Contains  the  valiant  dead. 

No  cold  neglect  could  check  his  zeal, 

His  Country    was  his  pride, 
And  fighting  for  that   Country's  weal, 

The  hero  nobly  died  ! 

No  tomb-stone  marks  the  dreary  spot. 

Where  sleeps  the  wirrioi-  brave  ; 
His  fame,  his  actions,  quite  forgot, 
A.nd  buried  in  his  "rave. 


•WAR.  173 

tluvhold  ;  and  "the  number 'of  his  men  was  about  fifteen 
-hundred  ;  being  in  the  proportion  of  one  Yankee  to.  ten 
invincibles. 

8  Howsoever,  the  valiant  'husband  noted  of  the  states 
of  Vermont  and  ISew-York,  called- militia,  commanded 
by  Mooers,  a  man  of  great  courage,  assembled  together, 
to  assist  in  the  defence  of  the  place,  on  the  borders  of 
the  river  Saranac,  which  emptieth  its  waters  into  lake 
Champlain. 

9  In  the  meantime,  Downie,  the  chief  captain  of  the 
fleet  of  Britain  upon  the  lake,  had  prepared  himself  to 
assist  Prevost  on  a  certain  day  appointed, 

10  When  he  was  to  come  out  against  the  fleet  of 
.  Columbia,  which  was  commanded  by  the  gallant  Mac- 

donotigh. 

11  Accordingly,  it  came  to  pass,  on  the  appointed 
day,  being  the  eleventh  of  the  ninth  month,  in  the  «ne 
thousand  eight  hundred  and  fourteenth  year  of .  the 
Christian -era,  ( 

12  And  three  hundred  and  sixty-five  days  after  011- 
•  ver  had  captured  the  king's  fleet  on  the  waters  of  Erie, 

13  That  the  strong  vessels  of  Britain  appeared,  with 
their  sails  spread,  moving  upon  the  bosom  of  lake 
Champlain,  coming  against  the  fleet  of  Columbia. 

14  Now  it  was  in  the  morning,  about  the  ninth  hour, 
when  Macdonough  beheld  the  fleet  of  Britain  sailing 
boldly  towards  him. 

15  And  it  was  so,  that  the  vessels  of  Columbia 
were  safely  moored  in  the  bay  of  Pittsburgh,  where 
they  waited  the  approach  of  the  enemy;  who  were  the 
strongest  in  numbers,  and  in  their  engines  of  djatb. 


ft  JA  -LATE 

16  However,  when  they  were  about  a  furlong  off. 
'they  cast  their  anchors,  and  set  themselves  in  battle  ar- 
ray, squadron  against  squadron. 

17  Now  the  sound  of  the  battle-drum  was  heard 
along  the  lake,  and  the  brave  mariners  shouted  aloud 
ior  the  fight. 

18  Then  began  their  destreying  engines  to  utter  their 
voices,  and  it  was  like  unto  the  voice  of  mighty  thun- 
ders. 

19  And  the  same  hour,  the  armies  on  the  shore.be- 
.  ganthe  dreadful  battle  with  their  roaring  engines. 

20  So  that  on  the  land  and  on  the  waters  the  fire  and 
smoke  were  abundant,  and  the  noise  thereof  was  tre- 
mendous beyond  measure. 

21  And  the  battle  waxed  hot,  and  the  vessels  of 
Downie  fought  bravely  against  the  vessels  of  Macdon- 
ough  : 

22  Nevertheless,  the  Lord  of  hosts  favored  the  men 
of  Columbia,  and  they  overcame  the  servants  of  the 
king. 

23  For  in  about  the  space  of  three  hours,  the  vja- 
liant  Macdonough  and  his  brave  men,  captured  the 
whole  fleet  of  Britain,  save  a  ievf  gun-boats,  that  made 
good  their  escape. 

24  Now  the  killed  and  wounded  of  the  king's  fleet, 
were  an  hundred  ninety  and  four  ;  and  Downie,  the 
chief  captain,  was  amongst  the  slain. 

25  Moreover,  the  number  of  the  captives  of,  the 
men  of  Britain  was  about  four  hundred. 

26  Now  Macdonough  was  a  good  man,  neither  was 
he  fill  of   boasting    and  vaiu-glory  :    he  arrogated  .to 


WAR.  175 

himself  no  praise  en  account  of  his  success,  but  ascribed 
the  victory  to  the  pleasure  of  the  Almighty. 

27  And  as  it  is  written,  in  the  word  of  the  Lord, 

Do    UNTO    ALL    MEN     AS     YE     WOULD?    THEY    SHOULD    DO- 

unto  you,  so  he  took  care  of  the  prisoners,  and  em- 
ployed skilful  physicians  to  bind  up  the  wounds  of  tfr& 
maimed. 

28  Then  were  the  children  of  Columbia  exceedingly 
rejoiced  ;  yea,  their  hearts  were  made  glad  ;  and  they 
praised  Macdonough  for  his  noble  deeds. 

29  Moreover,  the  great  Sanhedrim  honored  him  ; 
and  a  piece  of  land,  which  overlooketh  the  kike,  was. 
given  unto  him,  for  an  inheritance^ 

30  That,  in  his  old  age,    and   when  he  was    well 
stricken   in  years,  he  might  remember     with  joy  the 
strength  of  his  youth,  and  smile  upon  the  spot,  where 
fleet  to   fleet,  he    triumphed .  over  the  enemies  of  free- ' 
dom  ; 

3 1  And  where  his  children's  children  might  point-. 
and  say,  Tt  was  there  the  guardian  angel  of  Co- 
lumbia permitted  our  father  to  humble  the  pride  e$ 
Britain. 


m  LATE' 


CHAP.  XLVIT. 


I 


Mttik   of  Plattstiurgh — defeat  of  Sir    George  Fne- 
vost, 


Jc^rOW  while  Macdonough  was   capturing  the  royai' 
fleet  of  Britain,  upon    the   lake,   the  gallant  Macomb 
scattered  destruction  amidst  the  army  of  Prevost. 
)  2  Ami  the  battle  raged  with  great   violence,  and  the 
men  of  Britain  strove  hard  to  pass  over  the  river  called 
Saranac ; 

3  But  the  men  of  war  of  Columbia,  who  were  upon 
the  opposite  side  of  the  water,  opposed  them,  and  slew 
ihem  with  gredt  slaughter. 

4  And  the  brave  Grosvenor,  and  Hamilton,  an  ! 
Riky,  and  the  gallant  Cronk,  drove  them  back  fiom 
crossing  the  bridges. 

5  Likewise,  many  were  slain  in  the  river,  so  that  the 
waters  of  the  Saranac  were  dyed  with  the  blood  of 
the  servants  of  the  king. 

6  But  Macomb  kept  the  engines  at  work  ;  and 
Brookj,  and  tiichards,  and  Smith,  who  were  in  the 
forts,  displayed  much  valor,  and  caused  the  engines  to 
vomit  fire  and  smoke,  and  balls  of  heavy  metal. 

7  Howsoever,  when  Prevost  saw  that  the  king's 
fleet  was  captured,  he  began  to  be  disheartened,  and  his* 
whole  army  was  amazed. 


WAR.  177 

&  Notwithstanding  this,  they  continued  to  cast  their 
balls,  and  their  rockets,  and  their  bomb-shells,  and  their 
sharpnells,  with  all  their  might. 

9  Now  these  sharpnells  were  unknown  even  to  the- 
children  of  Columbia,  for  they  were  lately  invented  by 
the  wise  men  of  Britain. 

10  But  the  people  of  Columbia  trusted  in  the. 
strength  of  their  arms,  more  than  in  the  strength  ci- 
these  shells,  so  they  used  them  not. 

11  Nevertheless,  the  army  of  the  king  fought  hard^ 
with  their  battering-rams,  against  the  strong  hold  of  Co- 
lumbia, until  the  setting  of  the  sun,  when  their  noises 
were  silenced  by  the  brave  band  of  Columbia. 

12  So  the  same  night,  Prevost,  and  the  invincibles  of 
the  king,  fled  towards  the  strong  hold  of  Montreal  ; 
leaving  their  sick  and  wounded  behind  to  the  mercy  of 
the  men  of  Columbia;  destroying  their  provisions,  which 
in  their  haste  they  could  not  carry  away. 

13  And  the  men  of  Columbia  followed  them  a  little 
way,  and  slew  some,  and  made  many  captives. 

14  Thus  were  the  men  of  war  of  Britain  conquered 
in  the  north,  army  against  army,  fleet  against  fleet,  and 
squadron  against  squadron. 

15  And  the  killed  and  wounded  of  the  army  of  the 
king  that  day,  were  about  a  thousand  men  ;  and  about 
three  hundred  who  were  tired  of  their  bondage,  left  the 
service  of  the  king,*  and  joined  the  banners  of  the  great 
banned  rim. 

16  Now  Macomb   received  much  praise  for  his  bra° 

*  Deserters. 
Q 


tTS  LATE 

very  ;  and  his  name  shall  be  remembered  by  ages  yet  an-' 
bora. 

17  Moreover,  he  spake  well  of  all  the  officers  and 
ra6n  who"  fought  with  him. 

18  And  Mooers,  who  commanded  the  brave  husband- 
men of  New- York  and  Vermont,  and  Strong,  the  valiant 
chief  captain  of  the  men  called  volunteers,  had  great 
honor  for  their  noble  deeds. 

19  Likewise,  Appling,  and  Wool,  and  Leonard  and 
Sproul,  distinguished  themselves  among  the  brave. 

20  But  when  the  news  of  the  capture  of  the  fleet,  and 
the  defeat  of  their  mighty  army,  reached  the  lords  of 
Britain,  they  put  their  fingers  in  their  ears,  that  they 
might  not  hear  it. 

21  Neither  would  they  believe  it ;  but  when  they 
found  it  wets  so  of  a  truth,  they  were  enraged  out  of 
measure. 

22  And  their  wise  men  and  their  counsellors  said,  Lo! 
we  have  only  been  trifling  with  these  Yankees  ;  now 
let  us  send  forth  a  mighty  fleet  and  an  army  to  over- 
whelm them. 


WAH,  W9 


CHAP.  XLVIII. 

Attack  on  Bultimorc,  by  the  British  army,  wrier  Gen, 
Rons,  and  thefieet  under  Admirals  Cochrane  an$ 
.Cockburn. 


N< 


OW  when  Ross  and  Coekburn  returned  from  their 
burning  and  pillaging,  and  all  the  barbarities  they  com- 
mitted at  Washington,  the  chief  city,  and  the  neighbor- 
hood  thereof; 

2  Emboldened  by  the  success  of  the,ir  unrighteous 
xleeds,  they  gathered  together  their  army  and  their  navy, 
and  essayed  to  go  against  the  city  of  Baltimore,  which 
lieth  in  the  state  of  Maryland  ; 

3  That  they  might  commit  the  like  wickedness,  in 
which  they  .had  taken  so  much  pleasure  at  Hamptoij, 
Jlavre-de-grace,  and  Washington. 

4  But  they  had  a  mightier  place  than  Washington  to 
go  against ;  for  Baltimore  is  a  great  city,  containing 
therein  about  fifty  thousand  souls,  and  the  people  had  ep.r 
trenched  it  round  about,   and  made  it  a  strong  place. 

5  So  U  came  to  pass,  the  next  day  after  Macdonough 
had  captured  the  fleet  of  Britain,  on  lake  Champlain, 
being  the  twelfth  day  of  the  ninth  month, 

-6  That  their  vessels  and  transports  came  to  a  piace 
called  North  Pojat,  which  lieth  at  the  mouth  of  the  river 


180  LATE 

Petapsco,  about  an  hundred  furlongs  from  the  city,  and 
began  to  put  their  men  of  war  upon  the  shore. 

7  And  the  number  of  their  chosen  fighting  men,  who 
were  landed,  were  about  eight  thousand. 

8  And  when  they  were  all  moved  out  of  the  boats^ 
Ross,  the  chief  captain,  conducted  them  on  towards  the 
city. 

9  As  they  moved  along  their  instruments  of  war  glit- 
tered in  the  beams  of  the  sun  ;  and  the  waving  of  their 
squadrons  was  like  unto  the  troubled  waters   of  the 

ocean. 

10  However,    when  they    came  to  a  place   called 

Bear  Creek,  lo  !  the  army  of  Columbia  met  them  in  bat? 
tie  array. 

11  For,  when  the  gallant  young  men  of  Baltimore 
heard  the  rumor,  that;the  soldiers  of  Britain  were  com- 
ing upon  them  ; 

12  With  'the  spirit  of  freemen,  they  grasped  their 
weapons  of  war  in  their  hands,  and  went  out  to  meet 
'hem  without  fear  ;  resolved  to  conquer  or  to  die.* 

13  For  well  they  knew,  that  life  would  be  a  burthen 
to  them,  when  their  habitations  were  consumed  with  fire  ■; 
their  parents  slaughtered  j  and  the  innocence  of  their 
wives  and  sisters  violated. 

14  Now  the  name  of  the  chief  captain  of  the  army  of 
Columbia  was  Samuel,  whose  sir-name  was  Smith  :t 
a  valiant  man,  who  had  fought  in  the  days  of  Washington^ 
and  gained  much  honor, 

1       ■  ■  ■■  *t 

*  Although  it  may  be  said  the  British  were  net  nan* 
quered  ;  yet  they  were  defeated. 

Qev,  Smith. 


War,  m 

15  Moreover,  Samuel  was  a  man  well  stricken  in 
years,  and  he  had  many  brave  captains  under  him  3 
eVen  Strieker,  and  Stansbury,  aud  Winder  were  with 
trim. 

16"  New  it  was  somewhat  after  the  mid-day  when 
the  engines  of  destruction  began  their  roaring  noises  : 

U  And  the  fire  and  smoke  were  vomited  forth  out 
of  their  mouths,  so  that  the  light  of  the  sun  was  hid- 
den by  the  moans  of  the  black  clouds  'that  filled  the  air, 

1 8  And  their  rockets,  and  all  their  instruments  of 
death,  which  the  sons  of  men  have  employed  their  un- 
derstandings to  invent,  were  used  abundantly. 

19  Now  the  battle  waxed  hot,  and  the  gallant  Striek- 
er, and  his  brave  men,  fought  hard  :  and  it  was  a  dread= 
ful  fight, 

20  Inasmuch  as  the  slain  and  wounded  of  the  king 
that  day,  were  about  four  hundred  ;  and  the  loss  of  the 
men  of  Columbia  was  two  hundred. 

21  Moreover,  Ross,  the  chief  captain  of  the  host  e«£ 
"Britain,  was  amongst  the  slain  ;  a  boy,  who  had  accom- 
panied his  father  to  battle,  had  taken  dreadful  aim  at 
Ross,  with  his  riile,  and  killed  him  : 

22  And  the  people  of  Columbia  grieved  only  .be- 
cause it  was  not  Cockburn  the  wicked,  who  had  fallen  5 
for  ft  man,  whose  name  was  O'Boyle,  had  offered  five 
hundred  pieces  of  silver  for  each  of  his  ears. 

23  Nevertheless,  the  men  ef  Columbia  were  not 
powerful  enough  to  overcome  the  servants  of  the  king.; 
so  they  drew  back  into  their  entrenchments,  and  strong 
holds,  that  were  upon  the  high  places  round  about  the 
city. 

Q  2 


iW  -  LATE 

24  And  Rogers,  aud  Findley,  and  Harris,  and 
Stiles  were  among  the  captains  of  the  strong  holds  ; 
and  were  all  faithful  men. 

25  But  it  came  to  pass,  the  next  day,  when  the  men 
of  Britain  saw  that  the  men  of  Columbia  were  well 
prepared  for  battle,  Hhat  they  were  afraid  to  go  against 
the  strong  holds. 

26  So  in  the  middle  of  the  night,  which  was  dark 
and  rainy,  they  depai  ted  from  the  place,  and  returned 
to  their  vessels,  that  they  might  escape  the  evil  that  was 
preparing  for  them. 

27  Moreover,  they  took  the  dead  body  of  Ross, 
their  chief  captain,  with  them,  and  cast  it  into  a  vessel, 
filled  with  the  strong  waters  of  Jamaica  ; 

28  That  the  instrument  of  their  wickedness  might 
be  preserved,  and  conveyed  to  the  king,  their  master, 
and  be  buried  in  his  own  country. 

29  Now  it  came  to  pass,  in  the  meantime,  that 
Cochrane,  and  Cockburn  the  wicked,  the  ^hief  captain, 
of  the  mariners  of  the  king,  sailed  up  the  river  Petap- 
sco,  towards  the  strong  hold  of  Fort  M'Henry,  to  as- 
sail it 

30  Now  the  strong  hold  of  M'Henry  Iieth  about  fif- 
teen furlongs  from  the  city ;  and.the  name  of  the  chief 
captain  thereof  was  Armistead,  aman  of  courage  :  al- 
beit, he  was  sick, 

31  And  when  the  strong  vessels  of  the  king  drew 
irigh  unto  the  fort,  they  cast  their  rockets  and  their 

v  bomb-shells  into  it  plentifully  ^  and  strove  Jiard  to  drive 
the  men  of  Columbia  away- 


WAR.  13S 

32  But  the  gallant  Armistead  let  the  destroying  en- 
gines loose  up«n  them  without  mercy ;  and  they  cast 
out  their  thunders,  winged  with  death,  among  the  ser- 
vants of  the  king.  - 

33  The  loud  groans  of  their  wounded  floated  upon 
the  waters,  with  an  awful  horror  that  shocked  the  @*r 
of  humanity. 

34  And  it -was  so,  that  when  Cockburn  found  he 
-could  not  prevail  against  the  strong  hold,  he  also  depart- 
ed from  the  river,  neither  came  they  against  the  place 
any  more.* 


*  One  cf  the  gallant  defenders  of  Fort  M' "Henry- 
has  celebrated  this  circumstance  in  deathless  verse, 
His  voetry  is  so  exquisite,  and  his  descriptions  so  pa- 
thetic, that  we  cannot  resist  the  pleasure  of  presenting 
his  stanzas  to  cur  readers. 

The  Star-Spangled  Banner. 

■  ■O  !  say,  can  you  see,  by  the  dawn's  early  light, 

What   so   proudly    we    hail'd.at  the  twilight's   last 
gleaming, 
"Whose  broad  stripes  and  bright  stars  through  the  peri- 
lous fight, 
O'er  the  ramparts     we    watch'd  were. so  gallantly 
streaming  ? 
And  the  rocket's  red  glare>  the  bombs  bursting  in  air, 
Gave  proof  through  the  night  that  our  flag  was  still 
there  ; 
O!  say,  does   that  star  spangled   banner  yet  wav§, 
O'er  the  land  of  the  free,  and  the  home  of  the  brave"? 


184  -LATE 

35  Now  when  the  men  of  Columbia  heard  that 
Ross,  the  chief  captain  of  the  king,  was  slain,  and  the 
host  of  Britain  was  compelled  to  flee  from  before  the 
city,  they  were  exceedingly  rejoiced. 


On  the   shore  dimly   seen   through  the   mists   of   the 
deep, 
Where  the  foe'5  naughty  host   in  dread   sdence  re- 
poses^ 
What  is    that    which  the    breeze,     o'er  the  towering 
steep. 
As  it  fitfully  blows,  half  conceals,  half  discloses  ? 
Now  it  catches  the  gleam  of  the  morning's  first  beam, 
In  mil  glory  reflected  now  shines  on  the  stream. 

?Tis  the  star-spangled  banner,  O  !  long  may  it  wave 
©'er  the  land  of  thf  free  and  the  home  of  the  brave. 
And  where  is  that  ban']  wlio  so  vauntin^ly  swore 

That  the  havoc   of  war  and  the    battle's   confusion, 
A  home  and  a  country,  should  leave  us  no  more ! 

Their  blood  has  wash'd  out  their  foul  footsteps'  pol- 
lution. 
No  refuge  could  save  the  hireling  and  slave, 
From  the  terror  of  flight  or  the  gloom  of  tiie  grave, 
And    the     star-spangled     banner    in    triumph    doth 

wave, 
O'er  the  land  of  the  free,  and  the  home  of  the  brave. 
©.!  thus  be  it  ever  when  freemen  shall  stand, 

Between  their  lov'd  home,  and  the    war's  desolation. 
Blest   with  vict'ry  and  peace,  may  the   Heaven  rescu'd 
land, 
Praise  the  Power  that  hath  made  and  preserved  us  a 
nation  ! 
Then  coaquer  we  must,  when  our  cause  it  is  just, 
And  this  be  our  motto — "  In  God  is  our  trust  ;•"' 
And    the     star-spangled    banner    in    triumph    shall 

wave 
O'er  the  land  of  the  free,  and  thelioaie  of  the  brave 


-WAR.  185 

36  And  the  brave  defenders  of  Baltimore  had 
great  praise  and  honor  given  them  throughout  the 
land. 

37  And  the  names  of  those  who  fell  in  the  contest? 
are  they  not  written  on  the  monument  which  the  grati- 
tude of  the  people  of  BaUimwe  erected  to  the  memory 
Of  its  defenders  ? 


18$  LATE 


CHAP.   XLIX. 

Destruction  of  the  privateer  Gen.  Armstrong,  Sam- 
uel C.Read,  captain-~Scorpion  and  Tigress  cap- 
tured—  U.  S.  frigate  Adams  burnt — Castine—' 
Fort  Boyer  attached — destruction  of  the  pirates 
at  Barrataria,  by  Com.  Patterson — Gen  Jackson 
captures  Bensacola,  and  returns  to  New  Orleans, 


N< 


OW  the  loud  and  frightful  noise  of  war  sounded 
mpon  the  bosom  of  the  great  deep ;  and  the  shores 
of  Columbia  knew  no  peace. 

2  The  dreadful  clangor  of  arms  rung  upon  the  land, 
and  echoed  from  the  mountains  ;  and  the  groans  of  suffer- 
ing victims  floated  in  the  air  of  heaven. 

3  But  the  Lord  favored  the  people  of  Columbia, 
and  their  armies  and  their  navy  gained  strength,  and 
prosperity  was  showered  upon  them  :  the  voice  of 
war  became  familiar  to  those  who  where  strangers  to 
it  in  times  past, 

4  Now  on  the  twenty-sixth  day  of  the  ninth  month,  be- 
ing in  the  thirty  and  ninth  year  of  American  Indepen- 
dence, 

5~ It  came  to  pass,  that  a  certain  private  armed  ves- 
-sel  of  the  people  of  Columbia,  called  the  General 
Armstrong,  commanded  by  Samuel,,  whose  sir-jiamf 
-was    Read, 


WAR.  187 

6  Had  cast  her  anchors  in  the  haven  of  Fayal,  an 
island  in  the  sea,  which  lieth  towards  the  rising  sun, 
dbout  two  thousand  miles  from  the  land  of  Columbia  ; 

7  A  place  where,  two  score  and  ten  years  ago,  there 
Was  a  mighty  earthquake  ;  and  where  poisonous  reptiles' 
never  dwell. 

8  And  it  was  about  the  dusk  of  the  evening  when 
Samuel  saw  a  number  of  the  strong  vessels  of  Britain- 
hemming  him  in  :  so  he  drew  nigh  to  the  shore  for 
safety,  for  the  place  was  friendly  to  both  powers. 

9  Nevertheless,  the  boats  from  the  vessels  of  the  king 
went  against  Samuel  to  take  his  vessel ;  but  with 
his  weapons  of  war  he  drove  them  off  and  slew  numbers 
of  them,  so  that  they  were  glad  to  escape  to- their 
strong  ships. 

10  However,  they  quickly  returned  with  a  greater 
Humber  of  boats,  and  about  four  hundred  men  ;  and  Sa- 
muel saw  them,  and  prepared  to  meet  them. 

1 1  The  silver  beams  of  the  moan  danced  upon  the 
gently  rolling  waves  of  the  ocean,  and  the  sound  of 
the  oar  again  broke  the  sweet  silence  of  night. 

12  But,  when  they  came  nigh  the  vessel  of  Samuel, 
the  men  of  Columbia  poured  out  destruction  upon  them 
with  a  plentiful  hand  5 

13  Inasmuch  as  they  were  again  compelled  to  de- 
part to  their  strong  vessels  with  dreadful  loss. 

14  However,  about  the  dawning  of  the  day,  one  of 
the  strong  vessels,  called  the  Carnation,  came  against 
the  vessel  of  Columbia,  and  let  her  destroying  engines 
loose  with  great  fury. 

15  Now  Lloyd,  who  commanded  the  Plantagenet 


I8B*  t-ATE 

Was  the  chief  captain  of  the  king,  in  the  place  ;  and  h£- 
violated  tlie  law  of  nations. 

16  So.  when    Samuel  saw  that   the  whole   fleet  of- 
Britain  were  bent  on  destroying  h;3-  vessel,  in  defiance 
of  the  plighted  honor  of  nations,   he  ordered  her  to  be 
sunk. 

IT  -After  which  he  and  his  brave  mariners  deserted 
ner,  and  went  upon  the  shore;  and  the  servants  of  the 
sing  came-  and  burnt  her  with  fire  in  the  neutral  port  of 
tfayal. 

18  Nevertheless,  they,  received  the  reward  of  their 
unrighteousness,  for  much  damage  was  done  to  their 
vessels,  and'  their  slain  and  wounded  were  two  hundred 
two  score  and  ten. 

.19  Of  the  people  of  Columbia  two  only  were  slain 
and  seven  maimed  !  ! 

20  And  the  valiant  deeds  of  Samuel  gained  him  a 
name  amongst  the  brave  men  of  Columbia. 

21  Now,  in  the  same  month,  the  Scorpion  and  the 
figress,  two  fighting  vessels  of  Columbia,  on  lake  Hu- 
ron, were  captured  by  the  men  of  Britain* 

22  Likewise,  about  this  time,  there  were  numerous 
other  evils  that  befel  the  sons  of  Columbia; 

23  Inasmuch  as  a  brave  captain,  whose  sir-name  was 
Morris,  was  obliged  to  consume  his  ship  with  fire, 
lest  she  should  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy ;  and 
she  was  called  the  Adams.* 

24  Now  this  was  at  a  place  called  Castine,  which 
was  forcibly  occupied  by  the  strong  ships  of  Britain, 


U.  S-.  frigate  Adami. 


WAR.  189 

aad  lieth  to  the  east,  in  the  District  of  Maine  :  more- 
over, it  became  a  watering  place  for  the  servants  of  the 
king. 

25  But  when  James,  the  chief  governor,  and  the 
great  Sanhedrim,  knew  thereof,  they  sent  word  to  the 
governor,  and  offered  him  soldiers  to  drive  them  from 
tfte  borders  of  Columbia  ; 

26  But,  lo !  the  governor,  even  Caleb  the  Strong, 
refused  bis  aid,  for  he  was  afraid  of  the  wrath  of  the 
kiug  of  Britain.* 

27  (Now  Caleb,  in  the  Hebrew  tongue,  signifieth  a 
dog  ;  but,  verily,  this  dog  was  faithless.) 

28  Moreover,  it  came  to  pass,  about  the  same  time} 
that  the  strong  hold  of  Fort  Boyer,  being  at  a  plaee 
called  Mobile-point,  was  attacked  by  the  strong  ships 
of  Britain. 

29  Now  Mobile  had  lately  been  the  head  quarters 
and  the  resting-place  of  the  army  of  Jackson  the 
brave ; 

30  But  the  enemies  of  Columbia  had  become  tumul- 
tuous at  a  place  called  by  the  Spaniards,  Pensacola, 
whither  he  had  departed  to  quell  them  ; 

3 1  So  that  the  fort  was  defended  by  only  a  handful 
of  men,  commanded  by  the  gallant  Lawrence. 

32  And  the  names  of  the  vessels  of  the  king,  tha£ 
assailed  the  fort,  were  the  Hermes,  the  Charon,  and 
the  Sophie,  besides  other  fighting  vessels  j  which  open- 
ed their  fires  upon  the  strong  hold. 

33  Nevertheless,   Lawrence  was  not  dismayed,  al- 


*  See  tke  letter  of  Sec  Monroe,  and  Strong's  answer. 


&D'  LATE 

though  Woodbine,*'  the  white  savage,-  came  in  his' 
rear,  with  one  of  the  destroying  engines  and  a  howitzer, 
an  instrument  of  Satan,  and  about  two  hundred  savages. 

34  So  when  Lawrence  let  his  engines  of  death 
loose  upon  them,  and  had  showered  the  whizzing  balls 
amongst  them,  for  about  the  space  of  three  hours,  they 
fled. 

35  And  the  slaughter  on  board  the  ships  was  dread- 
M ;  and  about  three  hundred  of  the  men  of  Britain 
were  slain,  and  the  Hermes  was  blown  out  of  the  wa- 
ter into  the  air  With  an  awful  noise. 

36  The  loss  of  the  people  of  Columbia  that  day? 
was  four  slam  and  five  maimed. 

37  About  this  time  a  band  of  sea-robbers  and  pi- 
rates, who  had  established  themselves  upon  the  island 
<af  Barrataria,  were  committing  great  wickedness  and 
iepredations  j  and  were  ready  to  assist  the  men  of 
Britain. 

38  But  a  valiant  man,  called  Daniel,  sir-named 
Patterson,  went  against  them  with  his  small  fighting 
vessels,!  and  scattered  them  abroad,  and  took  their 
vessels,  and  destroyed  their  petty  establishment  of  sea- 
j'obbery. 

39  Now  it  came  to  pass,  when  Jackson  heard  thai; 
Tensacola,  the  capital  of  West-Florida,  had  become 
a  resting-place  for  the  enemies  of  Columbia  ;  and  that 
the  men  of  Britain  occupied  the  place,-  and  had  built 
ihem  a  strong  hold  therein  : 


*  The  eekhrated  Capt.  Woodbine,  of  the  British  nav^ 
t   Gun-beats, 


WAR.  19  i. 

40  From  whence  they  sent  forth  the  weapons  of 
war,  and  the  black  dust  among  the  savages,  to  destroy 
the  people  of  Columbia  ;  and  that  the  servants  of  the 
king  of  Spain  were  afraid  to  prevent  the  wickedness 
thereof ; 

41  Behold  !  he,  even  Jackson,  went  out  against  the 
place  with  a  band  of  five  thousand  fighting  men,  the 
brave  sons  of  Tennessee  and  other  parts  of  Columbia. 

42  And  it  was  early  in  the  morning  of  the  seventh 
day  of  the  eleventh  month,  when  the  host  of  Columbia 
appeared  before  the  walls  of  Pensacola. 

43  And  immediately  Jackson  sat  the  engines  of  de> 
struction  to  work  j  and  the  smoke  thereof  obscured  the 

44  Now  when  the  governor  Of  the  place  JhearJ  the 
noise  of  the  engines  of  death  and  the  clashing  of  arms^ 
he  was  smitten  with  fear ; 

45  Insomuch  that  Jackson,  the  chief  captain,  wh» 
with  his  army  had  encompassed  the  place,  quickly 
compelled  him  to  surrender  the  town,  and  beg  for  mer- 
cy j  which  was  granted  unto  him  and  his  people,  evea 
the  Spaniards. 

46  Now  when  the  men  of  Britain  saw  this,  they  put 
the  match  to  the  black  dust  in  their  strong  hold,  and  it 
rent  the  air  with  a  tremendous  noise. 

47  After  which  they  fled  from  the  land  into  their 
strong  ships,  that  were  in  the  haven  of  Pensacola. 

48  And  Jackson,  having  accomplished  his  purpose, 
.returned  with  his  army,  in  triumph,  to  the  city  of  Ney,> 

£Means,  on  the  second  day  of  the  twelfth  czoutk 


192  LATE 


CHAP.    L. 

Steam-boats — Fulton — torpedoes — attempt  to  blow  up 
the  Plantagenet — kidnapping  Joshua  Penny. 


N< 


OW,  it  happened  that,  in  the  land  of  Columbia, 
there  arose  up  wise  and  learned  men,  whose  cunning 
kad  contrived  and  invented  many  useful  things. 

2  Among  these  there  appeared  one  whose  ingenuity 
was  PTrceedinriy  great^  inasmuch  as  it  astonished  all  the 
inhabitants  of  the  earth  : 

3  Now  the  name  of  this  man  was  Robert,  sir-named 
Fulton  ;  but  the  cold  hand  of  death  fell  upon  him,  and 
he  slept  with  his  fathers,  on  the  twenty  and  third  day  of 
the  second  month  of  the  eighteen  hundred  and  fifteenth 
year  of  the  Christian  era. 

4  However,  the  things  which  he  brought  into  practice 
in  his  life  time  will  be  recorded,  and  his  name  spoken 
of  by  generations  yet  unborn. 

5  Although,  like  other  men  of  genius,  in  these  days, 
he  was  spoken  of  but  slightly  at  first ;  for  the  people 
said,  Lo  !  the  man  is  beside  himself  !  and  they  laughed 
at  him  ;  nevertheless,  he  exceeded  their  expectations. 

6  For  it  came  to  pass,  that  (assisted  by  Livingston, 
a  man  of  wealth,  and  a  lover  of  arts  and  learning)  lie 
was  enabled  to  construct  certain  curious  vessels,  called 
,p  the  vernacular  tongue,  steam-boats. 


•WAR.  igt 

%  Now  these  steam-boats   were  cunningly  contrived 
and  had  abundance  of  curious    workmanship  therein, 
such  as  surpassed  the  comprehension  of  all   the   wise 
men  of  the  east,  from  the  beginning  to  this  day. 

8  Jflowbeit,  they  were  fashioned  somewhat  like  unto 
the  first* vessel  that  floated  upon  the  waters,  which  was 
the  ark  of  Noah,  the  ninth  descendant  from  Adam ; 

9  And  that  they  might  heat  the  water  which  produ- 
ced the  steam,  there  was  a  fiery  furnace  placed  in  the 
midst  of  the  vessels,  and  the  sniokeissued  from  the  tops 
thereof, 

10  Moreover,  they  had,  as  it  were,  wheels  within 
wheels :  and  they  moved  fast  upon  the  waters  even 
against  the  wind  and  the  tide. 

3  i  And  they  first  began  to  move  upon  the  great 
jrjver  Hudson,  passing  to  and  fro,  from  New- York  t© 
Albany,  in  the  north,  conveying  the  people  hither  an^ 
thither  in  safety. 

12  But  when  the  scoffers,  :-the  enemies  of  Fulton, 
and  the  gainsayers,  saw  that  the  boats  .moved  pleasantly 
upon  the  river,  they  began  to  be  ashamed  of  their  own 
ignorance  and  stupidity,  and  were  fain  te  get  into  the 
boats  themselves ;  after  which,  .instead  jof  laughing, 
they  gaped  at  the  inventor  with  astonishment. 

13  And  it  came  to  pass,  that  the  great  Sanhedrim 
were  pleased  with  the  thing,  inasmuch  as  they  directed 
a  fighting  vessel,  cf  Columbia  to  be. built  after  this  man- 
ner. 

14  So  a  vessel  was  "built  to  carry  the  destroying  en- 
gines, even  a  steam  frigate,  and  they  called  the  name 
^thereof  Fulton  the  First  : 

.Lj  And  certain  skilful  men  were  appointed  comismr 
R  2 


294  LATE 

Siemens  to  construct  this  new  and  dreadful  engine  of  de- 
struction, 

16  And  Samuel,  a  philosopher,  sir-named  Mitchel, 
a  citizen  of  New- York,  was  one  of  the  commissioners  ; 
also,  Rutgers,  and  Morris,  and  W>  olcot,  and  Dearborn, 
were  other  commissioners  ;  and  they  all  gave  their  ser- 
vices freely  for  the  good  of  their  country. 

17  Now  she  was  equipped  with  thirty  of  the  engines 
of  destruction  ;  and  the  weight  of  a  ball  that  they  vom- 
ited forth  was  about  a  thousand  shekels. 

18  And,  when  the  movement  of  the  frigate  was  seen 
on  the  river,  she  was  as  a  strong  floating  battery  upon  the 
waters,  terrible  as  death. 

19  And  the  length  thereof  was  aboufan  hundred  cu- 
bits, and  the  breadth  thereof  thirty  cubits  : 

20  Moreover,  as  they  had  no  gophar-wood,  they 
built  the  vessel  partly  of  the  locust-tree,  and  partly  of 
the  majestic  oak  that  flourishes  in  the  extensive  forests 
of  Columbia. 

21  But  it  came  to  pass,  when  the  wise  men  and  the 
people  of  Britain  heard  of  this  steam  frigate,  they  were 
seized  with  astonishment  and  fright ;  inasmuch  as  it  be- 
came a  monster  in  their  imaginations. 

22  And  they  spake  concerning  it,  saying,  Lo  !  the 
length  of  this  wonder  of  the  world,  which  hath  been  in- 
vented by  these  cunning  Yankees,  is  about  two  hundred 
cubits,  and  the  breadth  thereof  an  hundred  thirty  and 
five  cubits  : 

23  The  number  of  her  destroying  engines  is  very 
great ;  and  the  weight  of  a  ball  which  she  vomiteth 
forth,  is  about  a  thousand  five  hundred  two  score  and 
ten  shekels : 


WAR.  195 

24  Moreover,  said  they,  she  iS  prepared  to  cast 
forth  scalding  water  in  showers  upon  the  servants  of 
the  king,  which  will  deform  their  countenances  and 
spoil  their  beauty  :  , 

25  Likewise,  they  have  prepared  her  with  two-edged 
swords,  which,  by  means  of  the  steam  of  the  vessel, 
issue  like  lightning  out  of  her  sides. 

26  And  now,  also,  the  cunning  and  witchcraft  of 
these  Yankees,  these  sons  of  Belial,  these  children  of 
Beelzebub,  have  invented  another  instrument  of  de- 
struction, more  subtile  than  all  the  rest  : 

27  Yea,  these  are  mighty  evil  things,  and  they  are 
called  torpedoes,  which  may  be  said  to  signify  sleeping 
devils  ;  which  come,  as  a  thief  in  the  night,  to  destroy 
the  servants  of  the  king ;  and  were  contrived  by  that 
arch  fiend,  whose  name  was  Fulton. 

28  Now  these  wonderful  torpedoes  were  made  partly 
of  brass  and  partly  of  iron,  and  were  cunningly  con.- 
trived  with  curious  works,  like  unto  a  clock  ;  a»d  as  it 
were  a  large  balL 

29  And,  after  they  were  prepared,  and  a  great 
quantity  of  the  black  dust  put  therein,  they  were  let 
down  into  the  water,  nigh  unto  the  strong  ships,  with 
intent  to  destroy  them  ; 

30  And  it  was  so,  that  when  they  struck  against  the 
bottom  of  the  ship,  the  black  dust  in  the  torpedo 
would  catch  fire,  and  burst  forth  with  tremendous  roar, 
casting  the  vessel  out  of  the  waters  and  bursting  her 
in  twain. 

31  New  these  torpedoes  were  brought  into  practice 
during  the  war,  although  the  war  ceased  before  they  did 


106  .LATE 

that  destruction  to  the  enemies  of  Columbia,  for  which 
they  were  intended. 

32  However,  a  certain   man  of  courage  and  enter 
.^riize,  whose   name   was     Mix,  prepared  one  of    the 
torpedoes,   and  put  it  into  the  waters  of  the  deep,   at 
a  place   called  Lyn-Haven  Bay,  at  the  mouth  of  the 
■great    bajv  of  Chesapeake,  nigh  unto  the  town  of  Nor- 
folk, in  the  state  of  Virginia ; 

S3  And  it  moyed  towards  a  strong  ship  of  Britain, 
-called  the  Pkantagenet,  after  one  of  the  former  princes 
of  England ;  bm  an  accident  happened  a  little  before 
it  reached  the  vessel,  and  burst  it  asunder  in  the  waters 
with  a  tremendous  noise  ; 

3.4  And  spouted  the  water  up  into  the  air,  as  doth 
the  mighty  whale,  and  the  sound  thereof  was,  as  it 
^were  the  voice  of  thunder  ; 

35  And  the  servants  of -the  king  were  frightened 
horribly  by  the  means  thereof  j  after  which  they  trem~ 
bled  at  this  name  torpedo  ! — and  were  obliged  to  guard 
their  vessels  in  the  night,  and  put  a  double  watch  upon 

-them  ; 

36  Moreover,  they,  condemned  thi3.modeof  warfare, 
•saying  :  Verily,  this  is  a  foul  fashion  of  fighting  ;  inas- 
much as  by  yop.r  cunning  ye  Yankees  take  the  advan- 
tage of  us  ;  and  the  thing  is  new  unto  us. 

37  But  they  had  wilfully  forgotten,  that  in  the  life 
time  of  Fulton,  they  had  offered  him  forty  thousand 
pieces  of  gold,  if  he  would  bring  these :, torpedoes  iuio 
practice  in  their  own  country,  that  they  might  use  them 
against  the  Gauls,*  with  whom  they  warred  coutinu- 

*  This  was  about  the  time  of the  .Boulogne  flotiUfi* 


WAR.  197 

ally  for  more  than  twenty  years  :   Howbeit  they  proved 
faithless  to  Fulton,  and  so  he  did  it  not  for  them. 

38  Moreover,  it  came  to  pass,  that  a  certain  man,  a 
pilot,  even  Joshua,  sir-named  Penny,  became  a  victim 
of  their  spite,  because  he  attempted  to  go  against  them 
with  the  torpedoes  to  drive  them  out  of  the  waters  of 
Columbia. 

39  Now  Joshua  lived  at  a  place  called  East  Hamp- 
ton, being  at  the  east  end  of  Long  Island,  near  Gard- 
ner's Island,  opposite  New  London. 

40  And  the  men  of  Britain  came  to  his  house  in  the 
night,  and  stole  him  away,  even  out  of  his  bed,  and  caf- 
ried  him  on  board  a  vessel  of  the  king;  called  the  Fa- 
milies", from  whence  he  was  conveyed  to  Halifax,  in  the 
province  of  Nova  Scotia. 

4  Now  while  Joshua  remained  in  the  dungeons  ef 
the  king  he  was  treated  with  the  inhospitality  of  barba- 
rians ;  moreover,  they  strove  to  lead  him  astray  :  but 
he  proved  faithful  to  his  God  and  to  his  country ;  for 
he  had  known  the  wickedness  of  Britain  in  times 
past.* 

43  However,  they  kept  him  in  bondage  many 
months,  after  which  they  suffered  him  to  go  to  his  own 
country. 

43  For  the  chief  governor  of  the  land  of  Columbia, 
and  the  great  Sanhedrim,  in  their  wisdem,  had  ordered 


*  Joshua  Penny  had  been,  previous  to  the  tear,  im- 
pressed in  the  British  service,  and  hip*  in  it  a  number 
of  years. 


108  LATE 

two  of  the  servants  of  the  king  to  be 4aken  and  held  as 
hostages  for  his  safe  return ;  and,  but  for  this  thing, 
they  would  have  hanged  him^  even  as  a  man  hangeth  a 
do*. 


WAR.  199' 


CHAP.  LI. 


Affairs  in  and  about  New-York,  the  first  commercial 
city  in  America — icorking  on  the  fortifications  of 
Brooklyn  and  Haerlem — capture  of  the  British- 
tender  Eagle,  by  the  Yankee  smack. 


N. 


OW,  as  good  sometimes  eometk*  out  of  evil,  so 
the  people  of  New-York,  a  great  city,  which  lieth  at 
the  mouth  of  the  river  Hudson,  nigh  the  sea  coast,  and 
containeth  more  than  an  hundred  thousand  souls, 

2  When  they  beheld  the  wickedness  that  was  com- 
mitted by  the  servants  of  the  king,  to  the  south  an  d 
round  about,  began  to  bestir  themselves,  and  prepare 
for  the  dangers  with  which  they  were  likely  to  be  en- 
compassed : 

3  Scr  it  came  to  pass,  that  the  husbandmen  from  the 
surrounding  country  gathered  together,  and  pitched- 
their  tents  hard  by  the  city. 

4  And  the  number  that  came  to  the  defence  of  the 
place  was  about  thirty  thousand  valiant  men ;  moreover 
there  were  about  five  thousand  husbandmen  from  the 
state  of  New  Jersey,* 

*  The  exertions  of  Daniel  D.  Thompkins,  governor 
of  the  state  of  N.  York,  at  this  time,  mil  long  be  re-- 
mewbered  by  fte  people. 


200  LATE 

5  Now  these  men  were  called  Jersey  Blues,  and 
they  were  encamped  partly  at  Paules  Hook,  and  part- 
ly at  a  place  called  the  Narrows,  which  Beth  to  the 
south  of  the  city  about  an  hundred  furlongs,  where  the 
destroying  engines  were  placed  in  multitudes. 

6  And  when  the  term  of  the  engagement  of  these 
men  of  Jersey  expired,  they  grieved  only  that  their 
time  was  spent  for  nought ;  for  they  were  ready  and 
well  prepared  to  meet  the  servants  of  the  king. 

7  Nevertheless,  it  was  so  that  the  freemen  who  came 
to  the  defence  of  the  city,  built  strong  holds  and  forts, 
and  raised  up  fortifications  in  abundance,  inasmuch  as 
the  whole  place  was  as  it  were  one  camp. 

8  Moreover,  on  the  tenth  day  of  the  eighth  month, 
in  the  eighteen  hundred  and  fourteenth  year,  the  inhabi- 
tants assembled  together  in  the  midst  of  the  city,  even 
in  a  place  called  the  Park,  where  the  Federal  Hall,  a 
superb  edifice,  rears  its  majestic  front ;  within  the  walls 
of  which  the  wise  men,  the  expounders  of  the  law, 
preside,  and  deliberate  for  the  benefit  of  the  people. 

9  Now  it  was  about  the  twelfth  hour  of  the  day 
when  the  people  began  to  gather  themselves  together  j 
and,  from  the  porch  of  the  hall,  the  aged  Willet,*  with 
the  star-spangled  banner  of  Columbia  waving  over 
his  silvery  head,  addressed  the  surrounding  multitude. 

10  And  the  people  shouted  with  a  loud  voice,  for 
the  words  of  his  mouth  were  pleasant  to  the  sons  of 
Liberty,  and  were  in  this  wise  : 


Col  Willet,  of  New-York. 


WAR*  20£ 

11  Lo  !  three  score  and  fourteen  years  have  brought- 
with  them  their  bodily  infirmities ;  but  were  my  strength 
as  unimpaired  as  my  Ibye  for  my  country,  and  that 
soul  which  still  animates  me,  ye  would  not  have  found 
nje  in  the  forum,  but  in  the  midst  of  the  battle,  fight- 
ing against  the  enemies  of  freedom. 

12  Thus  did  he  encourage  the  people  to  prepare 
themselves  for  the  protection  of  the  city. 

13  And  certain  wise  men  were  appointed  by  the- 
people  to  bring  these  things  into  operation.* 

14  So  the  people  began  to  fortify  themselves  andT 
entrench  the  high.places  round  about  the  city. 

15  And  when  they  went  out  in  its  defence,  to  build 
their  strong  holds  and  to  raise  up  their  battlements  \ 
lo  !  the  steam-boats  of  Fulton  conveyed  them  thither, 
about  a  thousand  at  a  time,  even  towards  the  heights  of 
Brooklyn  in  the  east,  and  the  heights  of  Haerlem  in  tho 
north. 

1 6  The  young  and  the  old,  the  rich  and  the  poory 
went  out  together  ;  and  took  with  them  their  bread  and 
their  wine ;  and,  cast  up  the  earth  for  the  defence  of 
the  place,  freely,  and  without  cost  to  the  state.t 

17  And  whea  they  went  into- the  boats  to  cross  over 
the  river,  there  was  loud  shouting  hi  the  b6ats  and  oa 
the  shore. 


*  Committee  of  safety,  composed  of  the  Aldermen 
of  the  city,  and  their  assistants. 

f  The  services  rendered  on  this  occasion*  by  that  re* 
spectable  class  of  citizens,  the  firemen  op  new- 
yo£k?  were  particularly  conspicuous. 

S 


202  LATE 

18  Moreover,  as  they  passed  along  up  the  Hudson^ 
towards  the  heights  of  Haerlem,  the  fair  daughters  of 
Columbia,  with  hearts  glowing  with  patriotism,  waved 
their  lily  hands  in  token  of  applause. 

19  Likewise,  bands  of  men  came  from  the  neigh- 
bourhood round  about ;  even  from  Newark,  and  Pat- 
terson, and  Paules  Hook,  which  lie  in  the  state  of  New- 
Jersey. 

20  They  had  also  captains  appointed  over  their 
bands  ;  and  Abraham  and  David  were  two  among  the 
captains.* 

21  Now  Abraham,  with  his  band,  came  a  great  way, 
even  from  the  town  of  Patterson,  where  the  wonderful 
waterfalls  pour  headlong  over  the  rocky  mountains,  re- 
flecting in  the  sun  a  thousand  brilliant  rainbows. 

22  Thus  for  an  hundred  days  did  the  people  of  New- 
York  prepare  themselves  for  danger,  and  cast  up  en- 
trenchments for  many  furlengs  round  about  the  city  j 
so  that  the  people  of  Britain  were  afraid  to  go  against  it.f 


*  Major  Godwin  and  Major  Hunt. 

t  So  great  was  the  enthusiasm  of  the  people  in  con~ 
tributing  their  personal  services  to  the  erection  of  for- 
tifications on  the  heights  of  Haerlem  and  Brooklyn, 
that  scarcely  could  an  individual  be  found  in  the  po- 
pulous city  of  Nac-York,  from  hoary  age  to  tender 
youth,  capable:  of  using  a  mattock  or  a  spade,  who  did 
not  volunteer  his  services  in  this  work  of  patriotism. 
Ev:n  the  Ladies  were  conspicuous  in  aiding  and 
chet  >?r<g  the  labours  of  their  Fathers,  their  Husbands, 
{heir  brothers,  and  their  Children.  Amongst  others, 
the  numerous  societies  of  Freemasons  joined  in  a  body, 
find  headed  by  their  Grand-Master y*  who    was  also 

•#-  Hwi'Pe  y/M  Cimiop,  noiv  £o*eraorot  UiesTaieoi  Kew.Yorfc 


WAR.  203 

23  Nevertheless  the  strong  ships  of  war  of  Britain 
Jnoved  upon  the  waters  of  the  ocean  around  the  place 
in  numbers,  but  they  were  afraid  to  approach  the  city ; 
for  when  they  came  nigh,  the  men  of  Columbia  let  the 
destroying   engines  loose  upon  them,   even  those  that 


Mayor  of  the  city,  proceeded  to  Brooklyn,  and  assist- 
ed very  spiritedly  in  its  defence.  On  this  occasion 
an  elderly  gentleman,  one  of  the  order,  who  had  two 
sons  (his  only  children)  in  the  service  of  his  country r, 
one  of  them  highly  distinguished  during  the  war  for 
his  wounds  and  his  bravery,  sung  the  following  stanzas, 
in  his  own  character  of  Mason  and  Father,  ichilst  the 
Lodges  were  at  refreshment  : 

1. 

Hail,  Children  of  light !  whom  the  Charities  send. 
Where  the   bloodhounds  of   Britain  are  shortly  ex- 
pected ; 
Who,  your  country,  your  wives,  your  firesides  to  defend, 
On  the  summit  of  Brooklyn  have  ramparts  erected  : 
Firm  and  true  to  the  trade, 
Continue  y  our  aid, 
Till  the  top-stone  with  shouting  triumphant  is  laid  : 
The  free  and  accepted  will  never  despair, 
Led  on  by  their  worthy  Grand  Master  and  Mayor, 

II. 

For  me,  whose  dismissal  must  shortly  arrive, 

To  Heav'n  I  prefer  this  my  fervent,  petition  : 
*S  May  I  never  America's  freedom  survive, 

u  Nor  behold  her  disgrac'd  by  a  shameful  submission  : 
"  And,  though  righteously  steel'd, 
"  If  at  last  she  must  yield, 
"  May  my  sons  do  their  duty,  and  die  in  the  field  'P 
But  the  free  and  accepted  will  never  despair, 
Led  on  by  their  worthy  Grand  Master  and  Mayor. 


104  LATE 

vomited  forth  whizzing  balls,  like  shooting  stars3  red 
from  the  fiery  furnace. 

24  Notwithstanding,  the  haughty  captains  of  the 
ships  of  Britain  would  send  in  their  boats  to  rob  the 
market-men  and  the  fishermen  :  howbeit,  they  were 
sometimes  entrapped. 

25  For  it  came  to  pass,  upon  a  certain  day,  that  the 
Poictiers,  a  mighty  ship  of  the  king,  lying  at  a  place 
called  Sandy-Hook,  sent  out  one  of  her  tenders,  even 
the  Eagle,  in  search  of  this  kind  of  plunder  : 

26  Whereupon,  a  fishing  boat  of  Columbia,  called 
the  Yankee,  under  the  direction  of  a  chief  captaia 
called  Lewis,*  prepared  herself  with  a  number  of  men 
to  entrap  the  Eagle. 

27  So  they  took  a  fatted  calf,  a  bleating  lamb,  and 
a  noisy  goose,  B,nd  placed  them  upon  the  deck  of  the 
boat  ;  and  when  the  servants  of  the  king  came  nigh 
the  Yankee,  thinking  they  were  about  to  be  treated 
handsomely  with  the  good  things  of  the  land  of  Co- 
lumbia, their  hearts  were  rejoiced  ; 

•28  And  they  commanded  the  vessel  called  the  Yan- 
kee to  follow  after  them,  towards  the  ship  of  the  king, 
their  master  ;  but  at  this  moment  the  men  of  Columbia 
arose  up  from  their  hiding-places  in  the  hold  of  the 
boat,  and  shot  into  the  vessel  of  Britain. 

29  At  the  sound  of  which  they  were  so  astonished, 
that  they  forgot  to  pat  the  match  to  the  black  dust  of 


*  Commodore  Lewis,  commander  of  the  flotilla  in 
the  .harbor  of  New. York — Sailing-master  Percival 
gallantly  spnducted  this  expedition. 


WAR.  205 

tlie  huge  howitzer,  a  destructive  engine  made  of  brass, 
which  they  had  prepared  to  destroy  the  men  of  Colum- 
bia. 

30  So  they  were  confused,  and  surrendered  the  Ea^ 
gle  up  to  the  Yankee. 

31  And  as  they  came  up  to  the  city,  before  the  Bat- 
tery, which  is  a  beautiful  place  to  the  south  thereof,  the 
thousands  who  were  assembled  there,  to  celebrate  the 
Columbian  Jubilee,*  rent  the  air  with  loud  shouts  of 
joy,  whilst  the  roaring  engines  echoed  to  the  skies. 

32  Thus  was  the  lamb  preserved,  and  the  proud  and 
cunning  men  of  Britain  outwitted  with  a  fatted  calf  an" 
a  Yankee  goose. 


*  American    Independence. 


Eos      =•?  SAife 


CHAP.   LI1. 

Affairs  on  the  ocean — privateer  Prince  of  Neufc'hd- 
tel — Marquis' of  Tweedale  defeated  in  Upper  Cana- 
da— Capture  of  the  President— loss  of  the  Sylph 
— Capture  of  the  Cyane  and  the  Levant  by  the  Con' 
stitution — capture  of  the  St.  Lawrence — capture 
of  the  Penguin  by  the  Hornet,  captain  Biddle* 


& 


•TILL  there  was  no  peace,  and  the  evils  of  war 
continued  on  the  face  of  the  deep,  and  the  waters 
thereof  were  encrimsoned  with  the  blood  of  man. 

2  And  it  came  to  pass,  on  the  eleventh  day  of  the 
tenth  month,  in  the  eighteen  hundred  and  fourteenth 
year,  that  there  was  a  sore  battle  fought  between  five 
barges  from  the  Endymion,  a  strong  ship  of  the  king, 
and  a  privateer,  called  the  Prince-of  Neufchatel,  com- 
manded  by  the  valiant  Ordonneaux,  a  man  of  Gaul. 

3  Moreover,  the  number  of  the  men  of  Britain 
were  threefold  greater  than  the  people  of  Columbia ; 
and  the  fight  happened  near  unto  a  place  called  Nan- 
tucket,  in  the  east,  journeying  towards  Boston. 

4  Now  they  sat  their  engines  to  work  with  dreadful 
violence ;  but  in  about  the  third  part  of  an  hour  the 
barf  es  of  the  king's  ship  were  overcome ;  and  more 
tbaa  tfiree  score  aad  ten  of  the  men  *>f  Britain    ware 


war.  m 

s?:in  and  maimed  :  the  loss  in  the  privateer  wis  'zlr 
slain,  and  about  a  score  wounded. 

5  Now  this  battle  happened  in  the  sirae  month  i-r. 
which  more  than  a  thousand  men  of  the  warriors  of 
Britain,  commanded  by  the  Marquis  of  Tweedale, 
were  defeated  at  Black  Creek,  in  Upper  Canada,  and 
driven  •  to  their  strong  holds  by  the  men  of  "Columbia, 
tinder  the  gallant  Bissel.* 

6  Ten  days  after  which  the  steam  frigate,  Fultok 
the  First,  was  launched  forth  into  the  waters  at  New- 
'York, 

7  And  it  came  to  pass,  on  the  fifteenth  day  of  th* 
first  month  of  the  next  year,  that  one  of  the  tall  ships 
of  Columbia  fell  into  the  hands  cf  the  servants  of  the 
king  ; 

8  And  she  was  called  the  President,  after  the  title 
of  the  chief  magistrate  of  the  land  of  Columbia ;  more- 
over, she  was  commanded  by  the  gallant  Decatur, 

9  Who,  but  for  an  accident  that  befel  his  ship  the  day 
'before,!  whilst   he   was  moving  out  of  the  harbor   ef 

New-York,  would  have  outsailed  the  fleet  of  Britain,  and 
escaped,  as  did  the  brave  trad  persevering  Hull,  of  the 
Constitution,  in  the  first  year  of  the  wars| 

10  Nevertheless,  it  was  so,  that  Decatur  was,  as  it 
were,  surrounded  by  the  ships  of  the  king,  even  five 


*  Gen.  Bissel. 

t  She  was  injured  by  grounding  off  Sandy  Hook, 
%  Commodore  Hull,  in  this  affair,  gained  much  ap- 
plause, for  his  manoeuvres  in  escaping  from  the  Brittik 
fleeU 


Tm  LATE 

of  them  ;  so  one  of  the  vessels,  called  the  Endymion 
fell  upon  him,  and  Decatur  fought  hard  against  her,  and 
would  have  taken  her  ; 

1 1  But  the  rest  of  the  strong  ships  came  down  upoh 
him,  and  opened  their  thundering  engines,  and  com- 
pelled him  to  surrender  his   ship  to  the  fleet  of  Britain. 

12  However,  it  was  a  bloody  fight  ;  and  there  fell 
of  the  men  of  Columbia  that  day  twenty  and  four  that 
were  slain  outright,  and  about  two  score  and  ten  were 
maimed,  after  having  kept  the  destroying  engines  to 
work  about  the  space  of  three  hours  :  howbeit,  Decatur 
lost  no  honor  thereby. 

13  Two  days  after  this,  a  strong  vessel  of  the  king, 
called  the  Sylph,  was  cast  away,  in  a  dreadful  storm, 
at  a  place  called  Southampton,  being  on  Long-Island? 
where  more  than  ah  hundred  men  of  Britain  perished, 
in  the  dead  of  the  night ;  and  the  vessel  parted  asunder 
and  was  lost. 

14  Moreover,  there  were  six  of  the  men  of  Britain 
who  survived  their  brethren,  and  were  preserved  on 
pieces  of  the  wreck,  until  the  next  day,  when  the 
neighbouring  people  took  them  into  their  houses'  and 
nourished  them  ; 

15  And,  when  they  were  sufficiently  recovered,  that 
misfortune  might  not  bear  to;;  heavy  upon  them,  they 
were  clad,  and  silver  given  to  them,  and  they  were 
sent  to  their  own  country,  at  the  expense  of  the  people 
of  Columbia. 

16  (Blessed  are  the  merciful,  for  they  shall  obtain 
mercy,  saith  the  scripture.) 

1-7  Now  it  came  to  pass,  in  these  days,  whilst  the 
flee?  of  Britain  captured  the  vessels  of  Columbia,  wherv 


WAR.  -20$ 

they  caught  them  singly  upon  the  ocean,  that  the  single 
ships  of  Columbia  began  to  capture  the  ships  of  Britain 
by  pairs  : 

18  Inasmuch  as  it  happened  on  the  twentieth  day 
©f  the  second  month  of  the  same  year,  that  a  certain 
strong  vessel  called  the  Constitution,  commanded  by 
the  brave  Stewart,  fell  in  with  two  of  the  strong  ships 
of  the  king,  and  compelled  them  both,  in  the  space  of 
forty  minutes,  to  strike  the  red  cross  of  Britain  to  the 
stars  of  Columbia. 

19  And  the  slain  and  wounded  of  the  king's  ships 
were  seventy  and  seven;  of  the  men  of  Columbia 
three  were  slain  and  twelve  maimed  :  and  the  names 
of  the  vessels  of  Britain  were  the  Cyane  and  the  Le- 
vant ;  but  the  Levant  was  retaken  in  a  neutral  port,* 
by  two  strong  ships- oi  the  king.f 

20  Now  the  valiant  Stewart  and  his  brave  men  gat 
great  praise  for  their  deeds,  even  the  great  Sanhedrim 
of  the  people  honored  them,  and  gave  them  twenty 
thousand  pieces  of  silver. 

21  In  the  same-month  the-gaHant  Boyle,  command- 
ing the  privateer  Chasseur,  captured  the  St.  Lawrence, 
a  fighting  vessel  of  the  king,  in  the  fourth  part  of  an 
hour. 

22  And  the  killed  and  wounded  of  the  St.  Law- 
rence  were  thirty  and  eight  j  and  the  Chasseur  had  five 
slain  and  eight  maimed. 

23  Moreover,  it  came  to  pass,  on  the  twenty-third 

■  day  of  the  next  month,  that  another  fighting  vessel  of 

*  Pcrio  Prava.  |  Acasfa  and  Ncwc&sge, 


210  LATE 

the  king,  called  the  Penguin,  was  taken  by  the  Hornet, 
a  strong  vessel  of  Columbia,  commanded  by  a  man  of 
valor,  whose  sir-name  was  Biddle. 

24  However,  the  battle  was  a  bloody  one,  and  the 
vessels  kept  their  engines  of  destruction  fiercely  in 
motion,  for  about  the  space  of  half  an  hour  before 
the  flag  of  Britain  was  lowered  to  the  stripes  of  Colum- 
bia. 

25  And  the  slaughter  was  great ;  for  there  fell  of 
the  men  of  Britain  two  score  and  one  :  but  the  slain  of 
Columbia   was  only  one,  and  the  maimed  were  eleven. 

2@  And  Biddle  was  honored  greatly  for  his  cou- 
rage : 

27  But  this  was  the  last  sea-fight  of  importance,  be° 
ing  near  the  close  of  the  war. 

28  Now  about  this  time  the  navy  of  Columbia  had 
increased  more  than  fourfold,  and  the  fame  thereof  had 
extended  to  all  nations. 

29  For,  though  Columbia  was  young,  even  as  it 
were  in  the  gristle  of  her  youth  j  yet  she  now  began 
to  resume  the  appearance*  and  display  the  vigor  of. 
manhood. 


WAR.  2U 


CHAP.  LIII. 

British  fleet  arrives  near  New-Orleans — the  Ameru 
can  flotilla  captured- — attacks  by  the  British  upon 
the  army  of  Gen.  Jackson. 


N< 


OW,  when  the  lords  and  the  counsellors,  and  the 
wise  men  of  Britain,  heard  of  all  the  tribulations  that 
befelthemin  the  land  of  Columbia,  they  were  troubled 
in  their  minds. 

2  And  as  they  had  made  what  they  called  a  demon- 
stration  at  Baltimore,  they  bethought  themselves  of  ma- 
king another  demonstration  in  the  south. 

3  (Now  the  true  signification,  in  the  vernacular 
tongue,  of  the  word  demonstration,  had  always  been 
familiar  to  the  children  of  Columbia;  but  the  new  in- 
terpretation, although  it  wounded  the  pride  of  Britain, 
tickled  the  sons  of  Columbia  ;  for,  as  the  world  must 
think  to  this  day,  so  tiiey  could  only  construe  it,  an  oc= 
ular  demonstration  of  British  folly.) 

4  So  it  came  to  pass,  that  they  gathered  together 
their  army  and  their  navy,  even  two  score  and  ten 
fighting  vessels,  carrying  therein  about  twenty  thousand 
men  of  war;  and  the  name  of  the  chief  captain  of  the 
navy  was  Cochrane ;  and  the  chief  captains  of  the 
army  were  P&kenham,  Gibbs,  and  Keane. 


m  LATE. 

5  And  they  essayed  to  go  against  the  city  of -Nem^ 
Orleans,  which  lieth  to  the  south,  on  the.  borders  of  the 
great  river  Mississippi,  in  the  state  of  Louisiana,  which. 
was  covenanted  in  good  faith,  to  the  United  States  in 
die  days  when  Jefferson  presided- as  chief  governor  of 
the  land  of  Columbia. 

6  But  It  came  to  pass,  that  Jackson,  when  he  had 
returned  from  the  capture  of  Pensacola,  where  he  cork- 
ed up  the  bottles  of  iniquity  that  were  ready  to  be  einp- 
ried  out  upon  the  men  of  Columbia, 

7  Had  arrived  with  his  army  at  New-Orleans,  he 
began  to  fortify  the  place,  for  he  heard  it  noised  abroad 
that  the  king  was  bent  upon  taking  the  city. 

8  About  this  time,  Jackson  communed  with  Clai- 
borne the  governor,  touching  the  matter  ;  and  as  his 
men  of  war  were  but  few,  the  valiant  husbandmen  ofr 
Louisiana,  Tennessee,  Kentucky,  and  the  Mississippi 
Territory,  were  informed  of  the  evil,  and  accordingly 
they  flocked  in  multitudes  to  the  banners  of  Jackson. 

9  Now,  as  Jackson  and  Claiborne  had  counted 
upon  the  arrival  of  the  stroHg  ships  of  Britain,  so  it 
happened,  hi  the  latter  part  of  the  eighteen  hundred  and 
fourteenth  year,  that  they  made  their  appearance,  even 
in  the  twelfth  month  of  the  year. 

10  And  it  was  so,  that  when  they  had  come  as  nigh 
as  they  could  unto  the  city  with  their  heavy  ships,  some 
of  which  carried  an  hundred  of  the  destroying  engiwes, 
they  cast  anchor  :  % 

11  And  lo,  after  having  passed  a  certain  dangerous 
place  called  Pass  Christian,  they  prepared  their  boats, 
fpnlamiag  more  than  a  thousand  men,  and  sent  them 


WAR,  21S 

in  great  numbers  against  the  boats  of    Columbia  that 
were  upon  the  waters  of  the  lakes  about  the  city.* 

12  Now  these  small  vessels  of  Columbia  were  com- 
manded by  Thomas,  a  brave  man,  whose  sir-name  was 
Jones,  and  he  gave  them  hindrance. 

13  Nevertheless,  in  the  space  of  about  two  hours? 
tho  boats  of  Columbia  were  captured  by  the  vessels  of 
Britain,  one  after  another,  until  they  were  all  taken  : 
however,  the  mariners,  of  Columbia  fought  well,  and, 
gained  great  praise  ;  and  the  loss  of  the  king  was; 
about  three  hundred. 

14  Now  the  capture  of  the  gun-boats  of  the  United 
States  upon  these  waters  encouraged  the  servants  of  the 
king,  so  they  began  to  land  their  mighty  army  upon  the 
shores  of  Columbia  in  great  multitudes  from  their  boats  : 

1 5  And  they  pitched  their  tents,  and  cast  up  fortifi- 
cations, and  prepared  to  assail  the  strong  hold  of  Jack- 
son, the  chief  captain. 

lf>  And,  that  the  host  of  Britain  might  be  discom- 
fited  at  the  onset,  Jackson  went  out  with  his  army 
against  them;  but  the  men  of  war  of  the  king  were 
twofold  greater  than  the  men  of  Columbia,  so  Jackson 
v,      unable  to  drive  them  away. 

J  However,  lie  fought  bravely  against  them,  and 
si-  '-  numbers  of  them ;  albeit,  the  slain  and  maimed 
ef  Columbia  were  about  two  hundied;  so  Jackson, 
drew  back  to  his  entrenchments,  and  strengthened  him- 
self there. 


*  Lakes  Borgne  and  PoncJiartrcin, 
T 


$M  LATE 

18  Now  this  happened  on  the  twenty  and  third  day 
of  the  twefth  month,  in  the  eighteen  hundred  and  four- 
teenth year- 

19  And  it  Game  to  pass,  on  the  twenty-seventh  day 
of  the  same  month,  that  a  fighting  vessel  of  the  United 
States,  called  the  Caroline,  commanded  by  Daniel,  was 
set  fire  to,  and  blown  up,  by  the  heated  balls  of  the 
king's  fiery  furnaGe. 

20*  On  the  next  day,  the  whole  host  of  Britain  gather- 
ed themselves-  together,  and  with  their  might  went 
against  the  strong  hold  of  Jackson. 

2!  But  Jackson  let  the  destroying  engines  loose  upon 
the  servants  of  Britain,  and  compelled  them  to  return 
to  their  encampments  with  great  loss,  even  an  hundred 
and  two  score.- 

22  Nevertheless,,  on  the  first  day  of  the  first  month 
of  the  eighteen  hundred  and  fifteenth  year,  the  men  of 
war  of  Britain  came  again,  and  strove  to  dislodge  the 
army  of  Jackson ;  but  again  they  were  deceived,  and 
lost  about  an  hundred  men. 

23  At  this  time  there  arrived  to  the  aid  of  Jackson 
about  two  thousand  five  hundred  valiant  men,  from  the 
Backs-woods  of  Kentucky^ 

24  Disappointed  in  their  expectations,  and  failing  in 
their  attempts  to  discomfit  the  army  of  Columbia,  the 
captains  and  the  host  of  Britain  arrayed  themselves  ire 
their  might  to  go  against  the  hold  of  Jackson  with  their 
whole  force. 

25  And  the  morning  of  the  eighth  day  of  the  month 
W«s  pitched  upon,  by  the  men  of  Britain,  for  conquering 
the  host  of  Columbia,  and  settling  themselvgs  in  the 
fcindol  liberty. 


WAR.  215 

26  Ho  they  prepared  themselves  with  their  iascines, 
5.nd  their  scaling  ladders,  and  their  bombs,  and  thefc 
rockets,  and  all  the  weapons  of  destruction  that  the  in- 
genuity of  Britain  could  invent. 

27  After  \viiie~h  'Pakenham,  the  chief  captain  of  the 
host  of  the  king,  spake  to  the  officers  and  the  men  of 
war  that  were  under  him,  saying, 

28  Be  ye  prepared  ;  for,  lo  !  to-morrow,  at  the  dawn- 
ing of  the  day,  our  mighty  squadrons  shall  rush  upon 
these  "Yankees,  and  destroy  them. 

29  Here  will  we  establish  ourselves  upon  the  borders 
df  Columbia  ;  and  ye  shall  be  officers,  tythemen,  and 
tax-gatherers,  under  the  king,  your  master  : 

<0  Moreover,  a  day  and  a  night  shall  ye  plunder  and 
•riot :  and  your  watch-word  shall  be,  BEAUTY  ANP 
fcOQTY:! 


?lt  LATE 


CHAP.   LIV 

Grand  Battle  of  New-Orleans. 


.L%  0\V  Pakenham,  the  chief  captain  of  the  host  of 
Britain,  made  an  end  of  addressing  the  officers  and  the 
soldiers  of  the  king  : 

2  And  it  came  to  pass,  in  the  one  thousand  eight 
hundred  aud  fifteenth  year  of  the  Christain  era,  in 
the  first  month  of  the  year,  and  on  the  eighth  day  of 
the  month, 

3  Being  on  the  Sabbath  day,  (which,  as  it  is  written 
in  the  scriptures,    Thou  shalt  remember  and  keep 

HOLY,) 

4  That  the  mighty  army  of  the  king,  which  had 
moved  out  of  the  strong  ships  of  Britain,  came,  in  their 
strength,  to  make  conquest  of  the  territory  of  Colum- 
bia, which  iieth  to  the  south  ; 

5  And  to  place  therein  a  princely  ruler,  and  all  man- 
ner of  officers,  the  servants  of  the  king,  even  unto  a  tax- 
gatherer. 

6  So,  early  in  the  morning,  they  appeared  before  the 
camp  of  the  men  of  Columbia,  even  the  strong  hold 
which  Jackson,  the  chief  captain,  had  fortified. 

7  Their  polished  steels,  of  fine  workmanship,  glit- 
tered in  the  sun,  and  the  movement  of  their  squadrons 
was  as  the  waving  of  a  wheat-field,  when  the  south 
wicd  passeth  gently  over  it. 


WAR.  217 

8  The  fierceness  of  their  coming  was  as  the  coming 
•  of  a  thousand  untamed  lions,  which  move  majestically 
®ver  the  sandy  deserts  of  Arabia. 

9  And  the  army  rested  upon  the  the  plains  of  Mac 
Frardies,  nigh  unto  the  cypress  swamp,  being  distant 
from  the  city  about  forty  and  eight  furl  >ngs. 

10  And  it  was  about  the  rising  of  the  sun,  when  the 
battering-rams  of  the  king  began  to  utter  their  noises; 
and  the  sound  thereof  was  terrible  as  -the  roaring  of 
lions,  or  the  voice  of  many  thunders. 

11  Moreover,  they  cast  forth  bombs,  and  Congreve 
rockets,  weapons  of  destruction,  which  were  not  known, 
in  the  days  of  Jehoshaphat. 

12  Nevertheless,  the  soul  of  Jackson  failed  him  not, 
neither  was  he  disHia\'ed,  for  he  was  entrenched  round 
about ;  and  when  he  raised  his  hand,  beheld  every 
man's  heart  therein. 

13  And  Jackson  spake,  and  ,  said  unto  his  captains 
df  fifties,  and  his  captains  of  hundreds,  Fear  not ;  we 
defend  our  lives  and  our  liberty,  and  in  that  tiling  tiie 
Lord  will  not  forsake  us  : 

1 4  Therefore,  let  every  man  be  upon  his  watch  ;  and 
let  the  destroying  engines  now  ■- titter  forth  their  thunders 
In  abundance  : 

15  And  ye  tunning  back-woodsmen,  who  have  known 
duly  to  hunt  the  squirrel,  the  wolf,  and  the  deer,  now 
pour  forth  yourstrength  upon  the  mighty  non,  that  we 
may  not  be  overcome. 

16  And  as  the  black  dust  cast  upon  a  burning  cdal 
instantly  mounteth  into  a  flame,  so  was  the  spirit  of  the 
husbandmen  of  the  backwoods  of  Columbia. 

17  Now  the   brave  men  from  Tennessee  &ijq  K.ec- 

.T    % 


518  LATE 

tucky  set  their  shining  rifles  to  work,  and  the  destroy- 
ing engines  began  to  vomit  their  thunders  upon  the  ser- 
vants oT  the  king. 

18  Twice  did  the   host  of  Britain,  in  solid  columns, 
*xome  against  the  entrenchments  of  Jackson,  and  twice 

%e  drove  them  back. 

19  Moreover,  Daniel  the  brave,  who  had  raised  up 
defences  upon  the  banks  of  the  river,  likewise  let  his 
-engines  loose  Upon  them,  and  shot  into  the  camp  of  the 
king. 

20  And  the  men  of  Britain  strove  to  scale  the  ram- 
parts, and  get  into  the  strong  hold  of  Jackson  ;  but  the 
husbandmen  drove  them  back  with  great  slaughter. 

21  The  fire  and  the  smoke,  and  the  deafaing  noise 
^that  sounded   along  the  battlements,  were  tremendous 

for  more  than  the  space  of  two  hours,  when  the  dread- 
"M  roarings  ceased,  for  the  warriors  of  the  king  fled  in 
>confusion. 

22  But  when  the  sulphureous  vapors  arose,  behold 
'the  battle-ground  was   covered   with  the  slain  and  the 

wounded  officers  and  soldiers  of  the  kingdom  of  Great 
.Britain  ! 

23  Humanity  shuddered  at  the  awful  scene,  whilst 
the  green  fields  blushed. 

24  Seven  hundred  of  the  servants  of  the  king  were 
^Tslain;  and  their  whole  loss  that  day  was  two  thousand 

six  hundred  valiant  men,  who  had    fought  under  Wel- 
lington, the  champion  of  England. 

25  And  Pakenham,  the  chief  captain  of  the  host 
•«f  Britain,  the  brother-in-law  of  Wellington,  was 
-amongst  the  slain ;  and  they  served  his  body  as  they 
•*'fead  served  the  bodj  of  Boss,  their  chief  captain  at 


wm.  2i'9 

the  Baltimore  demonstration,  prc-serving  it,  in  like  man- 
lier, with  the  strong  waters  of  Jajnaica. 

26  Moreover,  one  of  their  chief  captains,  whose  sir- 
name  was  Gibbs,  was  also  slain,  and  K'eane  was  sorely 
^wounded  :  so  that  the  charge  of  the  host  of  Britain 
that  remained  from  the  slaughter,  fell  to  a  certain  man 
whose  name  was  Lambert. 

27  The  loss  of  the  army  of  Jackson  was  only  se- 
ven slain  and  seven  maimed,  a  circumstance  unparallel- 
ed in  the  annals  of  history  :  howbeit,  there  were  about 
two  score  slain  and  wounded  upon  the  other  side  of  the 
river. 

28  Now  the  whole  loss  of  the  king's  army,  from  the 
time  they  came  against  the  country  of  Louisiana  until 
their  departure,  was  about  five  thousand. 

29  After  this  they  were  discouraged,  for  there  was 
but  a  faint  hope  left  for  them;  so  they  departed,  and 
went  into  the  strong  ships  of  the  king,  with  their  chief 
captain  in  high  spirits. 

30  It  is  written  in  the  book  of  Solomon,  that  a  fool 
laugheth  at  his  own  folly  :  now  the  men  of  Britain 
<were  not  inclined  to  laugh,  for  they  were  sorely  griev= 
ed ;  and,  but  for  the  fear  of  the  laughter  of  others^ 
would  have  wept  outright. 

31  And  Jackson,  the  chief  captain  of  the  host  of 
Columbia,  gave  great  praise  to  the  gallant  Coffee,  and 
Carrol,  and  Daniel,  whose  sirname  was  Patterson^ 
and  all  the  valiant  men  who  fought  on  that  glorious  day., 

32  Moreover,  Jackson  was  honored  with  great  ho- 
Hour  by  the  people  throughout  the  land  of  Columbia  J 
even  the  great  Sanhedrim  were  pleased  with  him,  and 

-exalted  his  name. 


220  -LATE 

33  And  the  inhabitants  of  New-Orleans  were  great- 
ly rejoiced,  and  carried  him  through  the  streets  of  the 
city  above  the  rest ;  and  the  virgins  of  Co  lumbia  strew- 
ed his  path  with  roses. 

34.Fory.Io!  he  had  defended  them  from  the  vio- 
lence of  savages,  who  came  in  search  of  beauty  and 
booiy .' 

35  And  when  the  wounded,  of  the  host  of  Britain, 
were  brought  into  the  city,  the  fair  daughters  of  Coluin- 
.bia  took  their  fine  linen  and  bound  up  the  wounds  of 
the  poor  fainting  officers  and  soldiers  of  the  king,  and 
.sat  bread  and  wine  before  them,  to  clteer  their  drooping 
spirits. 

36  Now  again  were  the  servants  of  the  king  disap- 
pointed ;  for,  as  they  were  sent  upon  an  evil,  as  well  as 
&  foolish  errand,  they  expected  nut  mercy. 

37  And  when  they  saw  the  goodness  that  was  shower- 
ed upon  them,  they  said,  Surely  ye  are  angels  sent  down 
/ram  heaven  to  heal  the  wounds  inflicted  by  the  folly  of 

nations ! 

38  And  should  we  ag.dn  be' led  on  to  battle  against 
your  country,  with  propositions  to  violate  your  happi- 
ness, our  swords,  as  by  magic,  shall  be  stayed,  and  drop 

harmless  at  the  feet  of  virtuje  and  beauty  ! 


'WAR.  221 


CHAP.  LV. 
Peace. 


JL^I  OW  after  the  fleet  of  Britain  had  departed  from 
New-Orleans  in  dismay,  they  committed  many  other 
depredations  of  a  petty  nature. 

2  In  the  mean  time,  Cockburn,  the  wicked,  was  busi- 
ly employed  in  what  his  heart  delighted ;  inasmuch  as 
he  carried  the  men  of  Britain  against  the  borders  of 
South  Carolina  and  Georgia,  and  continued  his  system 
of robbery. 

3  And  here,  with  the  strong  ships  of  Britain,  he  cap- 
tured a  town  called  St.  Marys-,  in  the  state  of  Georgia 
and,  among  other  evils,  he  stole  away  the  sable  sons  of 
Ethiopia. 

4  And  conveyed  them  to  the  island  of  Bermuda, 
of  which  the  king  had  made  him  chief  governor,  and 
cold  them,  after  promising  them  liberty  and  free- 
dom. 

■5  However,  it  came  to  pass  about  this  time,  thai 
the  news  of  peace  being  made  between  the  nations  arrl-» 
ved  in  the  land  of  Columbia. 

6  For  it  had  happened  that  the  great  Sanhedrim  in 
their  wisdom,  had  sent  out  Henry,  sirnamed  On  v.  and 


222  LATE 

ISussel,  two  wise  men,  called,  in  the  vernacular  tongue, 
commissioners,  to  join  themselves  with  Bayard  and 
Gallatin,  who  were  sent  before  them,  to  try  and  make 
^eace  : 

7  For  the  voice  of  the  people  of  Columbia  had  spo- 
ken peace  from  the  beginning  ;  they  wished  war  might 
cease,  and  that  the  breach  between  the  nations  might  be 

4iealed. 

8  In  the  mean  time  the  king  sent  some  of  his  wise 
wen  to  meet  the  wise  men  of  Columbia,  at  a  place 
called  Ghent,  a  town  a  great  way  off,  in  the  country  of 
Flanders  ; 

9  For  it  came  to  pass,  that  the  generous  mediation 
offered  by  the  emperor  of  Russia  was  refused  by  the 
council  of  Britain,  who  had  not  yielded  to  the  voice  of 
accommodation. 

10  So,  when  the  ministers  of  the  two  nations  were 
met,  they  communed  a  long  time  with  one  another, 
touching  the  matter  ; 

11  But  the  ministers  oT  Britain  raised  up  difficul- 
ties, and  demanded  certain  foolish  terms,  which,  in  the 
Latin  tongue,  were  written  sine  qua  non,  and  which 
being  translated  into  the  Yankee  tongue,  might  be  said 
to  mean  neck  or  nothing. 

12  Nevertheless,  in  process  of  time,  the  wise  men 
Of  Britain  waved  their  demands,  and  agreed  to  the 
sine  qua  non  given  them  by  the  commissioners  of  Co- 
hambia. 

13  So  a  treaty  of  peace  was  made  and  signed  by  the 
;-CjQjmnhsioner.3   of    both    parties,   on    the  twenty    and 

fourth  day  of  the  twelfth  month,  of  the  one  thousand 
*ei£ut  hundred  and  fourteenth  year  of  the  -christian  era; 


WAR.  233 

14  And  the  treaty  was  sent  to  England,  and  con- 
firmed by  the  Prince  Regent,  on  the  twenty-eigth  day 
of  the  same  month  ;  for  he  was  tired  of  the  war,  and 
saw  no  hopes  of  conquering  the  sons  of  liberty. 

15  After  which  it  was  sent  from  Britain,  across  the 
the  mighty  deep,  about  three  thousand  miles,  to  receive 
the  sanction  of  the  free  people  of  Columbia. 

16  And  the  great  Sanhedrim  of  the  people  examined 
the  treaty,  and  it  was  accepted  and  confirmed  by  them 
on  the  seventeenth  day  of  the  second  month,  in  the 
eighteen  hundred  and  fifteenth  year. 

17  After  which  it  was  ratified  and  signed  with  the 
hand-writing  of  James,  the  chief  governor  of  the  land 
of  Columbia,  and  published  to  the  world. 

18  Thus  was  a  stop  put  to  the  shedding  of  human 
blood  ;  and  the  noise  of  the  destroying  engines  sunk 
down  into  silence,  and  every  man  returned  to  his  owa 
home  in  peace. 

19  Now  when  it  was  known  for  a  certainty  that 
peace  was  ma'de  between  the  nations,  the  people 
throughout  the  land  were  rejoiced  beyond  measure. 

20  And  when  the  news  thereof  was  spread  abroad, 
the  temples  of  the  Lord  were  opened,  and  the  peopfe 
of  Columbia  praised  God  for  his  goodness  ;  yea,  they 
thanked  him  that  he  had  strengthened  their  arms,  and 
delivered  them  from  the  paw  of  the  lion. 

21  Thus  did  the  children  of  Columbia  praise  the 
Lord  in  the  strength  of  their  youth,  and  in  the  days 
of  their  prosperity  ;  not  waiting  till  the  cold  and  palsied 
hand  of  age  had  made  them  feeble,  and  robbed  their 
prayers  of  half  their  virtue. 

22  Henceforth  may  the  nations  of  the  earth  learn 


22'4 .  LATH 

wisdom  :  then  shall  peace  become  triumphant,  and  the 
people  of  Columbia  be  at  rest  ; 

23  And,  as  it  is  written,  their  swords  may  be  beaten 
into  ploughshares,  and  their  spears  turned  into  pruning- 
hooks. 

24  But>  nevertheless,  if  this  war  like  all  other  wars? 
brought  evil  upon  the  sons  of  men,  it  demonstrated  to 
the  world,  that  the  people  of  Columbia  were  able  to 
defend  themselves,  single-handed,  against  one  of  the. 
strongest  powers  of  Europe. 

25  And  the  mighty  kings  and  potentates  of  the 
earth  shall  learn,  from  this  example  of  Republican 
patriotism,  that  the  people  are  the  only  tt  legitimate 
sovereigns"  of  the  landof  Columbia. 

26  Now  the  gladness  of  the  hearts  of  the  people 
of  Columbia  at  the  sound  of  peace,  was  extravagant , 
inasmuch  a£(it  caused  them  to  let  loose  their  destroying 
engines,  that  were  now  become  harmless,  and  set  in  rac> 
tion  their  loud  pealing  bells,  that  sounded  along  the 
splendid  arch  of  heaven. 

27  Moreover,  they  made  great  fires  and  illumina- 
tions in  the  night  time,  and  light  was  spread  over  the 
face  of  the  land ; 

28  And  the  beauty  thereof  was  as  if,  from  the  blue 
and  spangled  vault  of  heaven,  it  had  showered  diamonds  : 

29  And  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  beheld  the  glory 
of.  Columbia. 

SND  OF  THE  HISTORY  OF  THE  LATE  WAR, 


WAR.  2§5 


ALGERINE  WAR, 

American  squadron  sails  from  New-York— -arrives  an 
the  Mediterranean,  and  captures  the  Algerir.e 
vessels — treaty  of  peace  with  the  Dey — affairs  at 
Tunis  and  Tripoli — Decatur^s  return  to  America, 


T 

*?  OW  it  came  to  pass,  that  while  the  war  raged  be-" 

tween  the  people  of  Columbia  and  the  kingdom  of  Great 

Britain,  other  evils  rose  up  in  the  east, 

2  For  the  people  who  inhabited  the  coast  ofBarbary, 
even  the  Ugennes.  c omi  tted  great  depredations  upon 
the  commerce/of  Columbia  j 

3  Inasmuch  as  they  captured  their  merchant  vessels, 
and  held  the  men  of  Columbia  who  wrought  therein  in 
cruel  bondage. 

4  Now  these  Algerines,  who  were  barbarians,  dwelt 
upon  the  borders  of  the  great  se  \  called  tiie  Mediterra- 
nean, in  the  way  journeying  tc  .  aids  the  Garden  of  F~ 
den,  the  cradle  of" the  world;  i  pen  paradise,  where  stood 
the  tree  of  good  and  evil,  and  wnere  the  great  iver 
1  •  :  p  i  ates  emptieth  its  waters  into  ihe  Gulph  <;;  Ptrsia, 
v  ',;:ii  1  th  b  '-;i  six  thousand  six  hi  dr<  ci  and  sixty-six 
niilei  to  liie  east  of  Washington,  the  chief  city  oi  the 
land  of  Columbia. 

U 


224.''  LATE 

5  Moreover,  the  waters  of  this  great  sea  washed  the 
shores  of  ancient  Palestine,  the  holy  land,  the  place 
of  our  forefathers,  and  the  country  of  Egypt,  where 
the  children  of  Israel  were  held  in  bondage  forty 
years. 

G  Nevertheless,  the  manifold  evils  which  these 
barbarians  committed,  by  the  instigation  of  Satan  with- 
in them,  or  by  being  led  astray  by  the  enemies  of  Co- 
lumbia, raised  the  voice  of  the  great  Sanhedrim  against 
them. 

7  For  they  had  violated  the  treaty  which  the  people 
of  Columbia  had  made  with  them  in  good  faith,  and  set 

^ji  at  nought. 

8  Now  it  had  curiously  happened,  that  through 
fear  or  folly  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  had  always 
accustomed  themselves  to  pay  tribute  to  these  barba- 
rians ; 

9  8ut  the  people  of  Columbia  were  the  first  to  break 
the  charm,  with  their  brave  captains  and  their  destroy- 
ing engines,  many  years  ago.* 

10  Howbeit,  they  were  now  again  compelled  to  go 
against  them,  and  strive  to  bring  them  to  a  sense  of  just- 
ice, if  not  by  persuasion,  by  communications  from  the 
mouths  of  their  destroying  engines. 

11  So  it  came  to  pass,  on  the  third  day  of  the  third 
month,  in  the  one  thousand  eight  hundred  and  fifteenth 
year  of  the  Christian  era, 


*  Alluding  to  the  war  against  the  Barbary  powers^ 
about  1804. 


War.  07 

12  That  the  great  Sanhedrim  of  the  people  sent  forth 
a  decree,  making  war  upon  the  people  of  Algiers, 
who  were  ruled  by  a  man  whom  they  tailed  the 
Dey. 

13  After  which,  the  fleet  of  Columbia,  which  had 
been  increased  by  the  folly  of  Britain,  was  prepared  to 
go  against  them  ;  and  the  gallant  Decatur  was  made 
chief  captain  thereof. 

14  The  number  of  the  strong  vessels  was  about 
half  a  score,  and  the  names  of  the  mightiest  amongst 
them  were  called  the  Guerriere,  the  Macedonian,  and 
the  Constellation. 

15  Now  the  name  of  the  first  of  these  tall  ships 
was  after  a  strong  ship  of  the  king  of  Britain,  which 
was  taken  by  the  brave  Hull,  and  burnt  upon  the  wa- 
ters ;  and  the  Macedonian  was  also  taken  from  Britain 
by  Stephen, sir- named  Decatur: 

16  And  when  they  came  into  the  waters  of  Europe, 
the  men  of  Britain*  gnashed  their  teeth  with  vexation, 
neither  would  they  hehoid  them,  but  they  turned  their 
backs,  for  their  pride  was  wounded,  whilst  the  surround- 
ing nations  beheld  the  fleet  with  astonishment. 

17  Now  it  was  on  the  eighteenth  day  of  the  fifth 
month,  in  the  same  year,  in  the  after  part  of  the  day, 
that  the  fleet  of  Columbia  spread  their  wings  to  the 
western  breeze,  and  sailed  from  the  haven  of  New- 
York  j  « 

IS  And,  with  Decatur,  the  chief  captajn,  in  the 
Guerriere,  they  bade  farewell  to  the  land  of  Columbia  ; 


*  4t  Gibraltar,  #c. 


223  LATE 

find  the  shouts  of  tlie  people  made  toe  welkin  ring, 
and  their  blessings  followed  aftej  then? 

19  And  it  came  to  pass,  when  Decatur,  -vith  the  fleet 
of  Columbia,  arrived  in  the  waters  of  the  Mediterranean 
sea,  being  thirty  days  after  he  left  the  land  of  Columbia, 

20  That  he  fell  in  with  one  of  the  strongest  fighting 
ships  of  these  barbarians,  called  the  Misoda,  and  he  fol- 
lowed after  her,  and  in  less  than  the  space  of  half  an 
hour,  after  letting  his  destroying  engines  loose  upon  her, 
he  took  her  captive,  with  five  hundred  men  that  were  in 
her. 

21  And  thirty  of  the  barbarians  were  slain,  among 
whom  was  their  chief  captain,  whom  they  called  Rais 
Hammida  ;  besides  many  were  wounded,  and  about 
four  hundred  prisoners  were  taken  j  but  Decatur  had 
not  a  man  killed. 

22  Moreover,  on  the  second  day  afterwards,  the  fleet 
of  Columbia  captured  another  fighting  vessel  of  the 
■Marines: 

~3  An,c]  the  bhh  that'Vere  found  on  board,  being 
numbered,  were  tWei  i\  and  three,  and  the  prisoners  were 
four  score  :  howbeit,  thtre  were  none  of  the  people  of 
Columbia  even  maimed.  Thus  was  the  navy  of  Columbia 
triumphant  in  the  east,  as  it  had  been  in  the  west. 

24  Now  these  things  happened  nigh  unto  a  place 
called  Carthagena,  on  Ihe  borders  of  Spnha ;  and  when 
the  Spaniards  beheld  the  skill  and  prowess  of  the  pece- 
pie  of  Columbia,  they  were  amazed : 

25  Immediately  after  this,  Decatur  departed,  and 
went  with  his  fleet  to  the  port  of  \lgiers,  the  chief  city 
of  the  barbarians,  lyin^on  the  borders  of  Africa. 

26  But  when  their  ruler  beheld  the  star-spanrrled  ban- 
ners of  Columbia,  he  trembled  as  the  aspen-leaf  j  for 


WAR.  22^ 

lie  had  heard  that  his  strong  vessels  were  taken  by  the 
ships  of  Columbia,  and  his  admiral  slain,  and  he  was 
ready  to  bow  down. 

27  And  Decatur  demanded  the  men  of  Columbia 
without  ransom,  who  were  held  in  bondage ;  and  ten 
thousand  pieces  of  silver,  for  the  evils  they  had  commit- 
ted against  the  people  of  Columbia  :  and  the  Dey  had 
three  hours  to  answer  him  yea,  or  Days, 

28  However,  he  quickly  agreed  to  the  propositions  of 
Decatur  :  and  he  paid  the  money,  and  signed  the  trea- 
ty which  Decatur  had  prepared  for  him,  and  delivered 
up  all  the  men  of  Columbia  whom  he  held  as  slaves. 

29  And  the  treaty  was  confirmed  at  Washington  the 
chief  city,  and  signed  by  James  the  chief  governor,  on  the 
twenty  and  sixth  day  of  the  twelfth  month,  in  the  same 
year :  and  Detatur  generously  made  a  present  of  the 
step  Misoda  to  the  Dey, 

30  Now  it  came  to  pass,  after  Decatur  had  settled 
the  peace  with  the  Dey  of  Algiers,  according  to  his  wish- 
es, that  he  sailed  against  another  town  of  the  barbarians, 
called  Tunis, 

31  For  the  governor  of  this  place,  who  is  ca4ed  the 
Bev,  had  permitted  great  evils  to  be  committed  agaiesi  trie 
people  of  Columbia,  by  theships  of  Britain,  during  the  late 
war  ;  inasmuch  as  they  let  them  conrp  into  their  waters, 
and  ta'<e  away  the  vessels  of  Columbia  that  were  prizes. 

-?2  So,  forthese  depredations,  the  gallant  Decatur  de- 
fiianded  forty  thousand  pieces  of  silver,  which,  aA'  r  & 
short  c  e''be;ation,  the  Bey  was  fain  to  ;.rraiit.  lest,  perad- 
vennre  the  city  might,  from  the  force  of  the  destroying 
tfxfgfc&s,  begin  to  tumble  about  his  ear§. 
V2 


230  LATE 

33  From  the  port  of  Tunis,  Decalur  departed  and 
went  to  a  place  called  Tripoli,  which  lieth  to  the  south 
thereof,  where  the  brave  Eaton*  fought,  and  erected  the 
banners  of  Columbia  upon  the  walls  of  Derne. 

34  Now  the  chief  governor  of  the  Tripolitans,  whom, 
they  called  the  Bashaw,  had  suffered  like  evils  to  be 
done  by  the  British  in  his  dominions  which  had  been 
permitted  by  the  Bey  of  Tunis. 

35  So  likewise,  for  these  evils  Decatur  demanded 
thirty  thousand  pieces  of  silver,  but  at  first  the  Ba- 
shaw refused  to  pay  it. 

36  However,  when  he  saw  the  strong  ships  of  Co- 
lumbia were  about  to  destroy  the  town,  he  paid  the 
money,  save  a  little,  which  he  was  unable  to  get,  and 
for  which  Decatur  compelled  him  to  release  ten  captives 
of  other  nations,  whom  he  held  in  "bondage. 

37  Thus  did  Decatur,  and  his  brave  men  in  the  same 
year,  compel  the  powers  of  Barbary  to  respect  the 
banners  of  Columbia. 

38  Now,  having  accomplished  the  object  of  his  ex- 
pedition, he  returned,  encircled  with  glory,  to  the  land 
of  Columbia  : 

39  And  all  the  people  were  rejoiced  with  great  joy, 
and  they  made  feasts  for  him,  and  extolled  his  name. 

40  Moreover,  the  great  Sanhedrim  of  the  people 
honored  him  for  his  gallant  exploits,  and  gave  unto  him 
and  his  brave  officers  and  mariners,  an  hundred  thou- 
sand pieces  of  silver. 


*  Gen.  Eaton,  a  hero  of  the  American  war  with 
Tripoli^  some  years  ago. 


WAR.  231 


CONCLUSION. 


Commodore    Bainbridge — Lord    'ExmouiJi's    Expcai 
Hon  against  Algiers. 


-N  the  mean  time,  it  had  come  to  pass,  that  lest  the 
flfet  of  Decatur  should  not  be  sufficient,  the  £feat  San- 
hedrim sent  out  after  him  another  strong  fleet,  com- 
manded bv  the  valiant  Bainbridg-e. 

2  But,  lo  !  when  his  fiVet  arrived  therp,  the  peacie 
had  b^en  made,  and  an  end  out  to  the  war  by  the  fleet 
of  Decatur  :  so,  after  sailing;  round  about  the  coast, 
Bainbridge  returned  home  again  with  the  fleet  of  Co- 
lumbia. 

3  Now  it  came  to  pass,  after  Decatur  had  returned 
in  triuinoh  to  the  land  of  Columbia,  that  the  lords  and 
the  counsellors  of  Britain  became  jealous  of  the  fame 
of  Columbia,  which  she  had  gained  in  the  east,  in  re- 
leasing her  people  from  slavery,  as  well  as  those  of 
other  nations. 

4  Moreover,  the  barbarians  committed  depredations 
against  the  people  of  Britain,  neither  did  they  regard 
their  royal  cross,  as  they  did  the  stars  of  Columbia. 

5  So  the  king  fitted  out  a  mighty  fleet  to  go  against 
them  j  and  the  name  of  the  chief  captain  thereof  was 


232  LATE 

Pellew,  to  whom  the  king  of  Britain  had  given  a  new 
name,  and  called  him  lord  Exmouth. 

6  Accordingly,  as  their  movements  were  slow,  in 
the  fourth  month  of  the  one  thousand  eight  hundred  and 
sixteenth  year  of  the  Christian  era,  the  mighty  fleet  of 
Britain  weighed  anchor,  and  shortly  arrived  before  the 
city  of  Algiers,  as  the  fleet  of  Columbia  had  done 
many  months  before  them. 

7  And  it  was  so,  that  the  chief  captain  of  Britain, 
n  the  name  (>(  the  king  his  master,  demanded  of  the 
Bey,  the  men  of  Britain,  whom  he  held  as  slaves,  and 
also  those  of  other  nations. 

8  But  the  Dey  rerused,  saying,  Ye  shall  pay  unto  me 
five  hundred  pieces  of  silver  for  every  slave  ;  then  will 
I  release  them,  and  they  shall  be  free. 

9  And  Exmouth,  the  lord  of  Britain,  jielded  to  the 
propositions  of  the  barbarians,  and  accordingly  gavfe 
unto  them  the  money,  eveh  more  than  twenty  horses 
could  draw  ; 

10  for  the  number  of  Christian  slaves  which  Ex- 
mouth  bought  of  the  barbarians,  was  about  five  hun- 
dred. 

i  I  Therefore  the  fleet  of  Britain  succeeded  not,  as 
did  the  fleet  of  Decatur.* 


*  Lord  Exmouth  has  sinrr.  in  a  second  expedition, 
succeeded  in  releasing  all  '  'hristian  captives  confined 
in  Algiers,  a?id  in  obtaining  the  ransom  money  ,  to  a 
very  considerable  amount)  which  the  Dey  had  pre* 
piously  received  from  England  and  Najjks. 


WAR.  233 

12  Thus,  in  this  thing,  did  the  lords  of  Britain 
strive  to  snatch  the  laurel  from  the  brow  of  Colum- 
bia ; 

13  Hut  her  valiant  sons  had  entwined  the  wreath  of 
glory  ;  and  the  scribes  of  this  day  shall  record  it,  in 
ever-living  characters,  on  the  pyramid  of  fame. 


frlNlSv 


BIBLE    SOCIETIES    AND    SUNDAY    SCHOOLS. 


It  was  our  intention  to  have  expatiated  largely  on 
the  subjectof  Bible  Societies —  of  their  importance,  and 
unprecedented  extension  throughout  Europe  and 
America  :  but  the  limits  of  this  publication  prevent  us 
from  entering  far  on  this  subject,  luminous  as  it  is  ;  how- 
ever, in  time,  another  opportunity  may  offer  :  at  present, 
the  names  of  the  officiating  persons  in  America,  by  be- 
ing inserted,  may  serve  to  show  the  respectability  of 
this  valuable  establishment,  which  posterity  will  ad- 
mire. 

OFFICERS   OF   THE    AMERICAN   BIBLE    SOCIETY. 

PRESIDENT, 

Hon.  EliAs  Boudinot,  l.  l.  d.,  of  New-Jersey 
VICE-PRESIDENTS, 
Hon.  John  Jay,  Esq.  of  New- York. 
Matthew  Clarkson,  Esq.  of  New- York. 
Daniel  D.  Tompkins,  Vice-President  of  the  United 

States. 
Hon.  De  Witt  Clinton,  Governor  of  the   State   of 

New- York. 
Hon.  Smith  Thompson,  Chief  Justice  of  the  State  of 

New- York. 

juun.  JOffS  Langdon,  of  New-Hampshire. 

Hon.  Caleb  Strong,  of  Massachusetts. 

Hon.  John  Cotton  Smith,  of  Connecticut. 

Hon.  Andrew  Kirkpatrick,  Chief  Justice  of  the  State 

of  New- Jersey. 
Hon.  William  Tilghman,  Chief  Justice  of  the  State  of 

Pennsylvania. 
Hon.  Daniel  Murray,  of  Maryland. 
Joseph  Nourse,  Esq,  Register  of  the  Treasury  of  the 

United  States. 
Hon.  John  Quincy  Adams,  Secretary  of  State  of  the 

United  States. 
Francis  S.  Key,  Esq.  District  of  Columbia- 
Hon.  Bushrod    Washington,  of  Virginia,  Judge  of 

Supreme  Court  U,  S. 


Hon.  Charles  Cotesworth    Pinckney,  of  Charles- 
ton, S.  C. 
His  Excellency  Thomas   Worthington,  of  Ohio. 
John  Boltom,  Esq.  of  Georgia. 
Felix  Grundy,  Esq.  of  Tennessee. 
SECRETARIES. 
Rev.  John  Mason,  D.  D.  Secretary  for  Foreign  Cor- 
respondence. 
Rev.  John  B.  Romeyn,  D.  D.  Secretary  for  Domestic 
Correspondence. 

Richard  Varick,  Esq.  Treasurer. 
Mr.  John  Pintard,  Recording  Secretary  and  Account- 
ant. 

Mr.  John  E.  Caldwell,  Agent. 


An  account  of  the   number  of  Bible  Societies  in  the 
United    States. 


New-Hampshire, 

1  1 

Virginia, 

15 

Massachusetts, 

14] 

North  Carolina, 

2 

Vermont, 

o 

South  Carolina, 

4 

Connecticut, 

•9 

Georgia, 

3 

New- York, 

66 

Ohio, 

11 

New- Jersey, 

16 

Kentucky, 

3 

Pennsylvania, 

12 

Tennessee, 

2 

Delaware, 

2 

Lounaua, 

1/ 

Maryland, 

o 

Michigan, 

1 

District  of  Columbia, 

1 

Missouii, 

1 

Total  number,  168. 
The  number  of  these  auxiliary  societies  are  rapidly 
increasing  throughout  the  world,  and  their  good  effects 
may  easily  be  anticipated. These,  and  the  establish- 
ment of  Sunday  Schools  in  different  parts  of  the  Uni- 
ted States,  has  had  the  most  salutary  effects,  and  eve- 
ry good  man  will  no  doubt  give  encouragement  to  that 
rich  source,  which  opens  a  ii eld  to  virtue,  and  plants 
.the  ever  living  seeds  of  a  glorious  immortality. 

Where  wisdom  dwells,  there  virtue  reigns. 


DANIEL,  D.  SMITH, 
BOOKSELLER  $  STATIONER, 

NO.    190,     GREENWICH-STREET, 

lleUJsjjfqrjr, 

Has  constantly  for  sale    Who'esalc  fy  Retail  on  the 

most  reasonable  terms  a  general  asssortraent  of  !?6oks 
and  Stationary  (particularly  School  Books)  air.ong 
which  are  the  following,)  viz  : 


Bibles  &  Testaments 
Spelling  books,  all  kinds 
Psalms  &  Hymns 
Hartford      Selection       of 

Hymns 
Methodist  Hymn  books 
Bap  list  do 
Common  Prayer  books 
Walkers  Dictionary 
Johnsons         do     &c. 
Aiosworths  Latin  &  Eng. 
"•■  ugents  Fr.&  Eng.  do 
Dufiefs          do  do 
Bayers          do          do 
Dufiefs  Nature  Displayed 
pWrins  Fr.  &  En.  grammar 
Perrins  Exercises 
Elements  of  conver- 


Greek  Grammar 

Latin     do 

Clarks  Introduction 

Mairs  do 

Huddimaq's  Rudiments 

JEutropie 

Jacksons     book    keeping 

and  others 
Ink  Powder  black  &  red 


Guthries  Universal  Ge^g. 
Cummings  do  &  Atlas 
Goldsmith's  do  &  do 

— History    of 

Rome  Greece  &  Eng. 
Weems  Washington 
Am.  Orators  &    Precep; 
Columbian  Orators 
Dialogues  for  Schools 
Monitors,  CliilJs  lustruc. 
Juvenile  Expositors 
Murray s   English  Reader 
Grammar  &  Introduction 
Murrays     Key   Exercises 

Sequel 

Expositors  and  Preceptors 
Dil worths  Assistant 

Gibbons     do 

Key  to      do 

Dabojls  Arithmetic 

Federal  Calculator 

American  Selections 

Art  of  Reading 

Childress  books 

Primers 

Blank  books  of  all  kinds 

Paper  of  all  kinds 

Sand  boxes  &c.  &c.  &c. 


Deacidified  using  the  Bookkeeper  process 
Neutralizing  agent:  Magnesium  Oxide 
Treatment  Date:  Dec.  2003 

PreservationTechnologies 

A  WORLD  LEADER  IN  PAPER  PRESERVATION 

1 1 1  Thomson  Park  Drive 
Cranberry  Township.  PA  16066 
(724)  779-21 1 1 